--- Page 1 ---
Rio de Janeiro Declaration
Strengthening Global South Cooperation for a More Inclusive and
Sustainable Governance
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
6 July 2025
1. We, the Leaders of BRICS countries, met in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 6 to 7 July
2025 for the XVII BRICS Summit held under the theme: “Strengthening Global South
Cooperation for a More Inclusive and Sustainable Governance”.
2. We reaffirm our commitment to the BRICS spirit of mutual respect and understanding,
sovereign equality, solidarity, democracy, openness, inclusiveness, collaboration and
consensus. As we build upon 17 years of BRICS Summits, we further commit ourselves
to strengthening cooperation in the expanded BRICS under the three pillars of political
and security, economic and financial, cultural and people-to-people cooperation, and to
enhancing our strategic partnership for the benefit of our people through the promotion
of peace, a more representative, fairer international order, a reinvigorated and reformed
multilateral system, sustainable development and inclusive growth.
3. We welcome the Republic of Indonesia as a BRICS member, as well as the Republic
of Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic
of Cuba, the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Malaysia, the Kingdom of Thailand, the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the Republic of Uganda, and the Republic of Uzbekistan
as BRICS partner countries.
4. We underline the significance of the adoption of the BRICS Leaders’ Framework
Declaration on Climate Finance and of the BRICS Leaders’ Statement on the Global
Governance of Artificial Intelligence, as well as endorse the launch of the BRICS
Partnership for the Elimination of Socially Determined Diseases. These initiatives reflect
our joint efforts to foster inclusive and sustainable solutions to pressing global issues.
Strengthening Multilateralism and Reforming Global Governance
5. We reiterate our commitment to reforming and improving global governance by
promoting a more just, equitable, agile, effective, efficient, responsive, representative,
legitimate, democratic and accountable international and multilateral system in the spirit
of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. In this regard, we take
note of the adoption of the Pact of the Future at the Summit of the Future, including its

--- Page 2 ---
two annexes, the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration of Future Generations.
Bearing in mind the need to adapt the current architecture of international relations to
better reflect the contemporary realities, we reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism
and upholding the international law, including the Purposes and Principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations (UN), in their entirety and interconnectedness as its
indispensable cornerstone, and the central role of the UN in the international system, in
which sovereign states cooperate to maintain international peace and security, advance
sustainable development, ensure the promotion and protection of democracy, human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all as well as cooperation based on solidarity, mutual
respect, justice and equality. We also reiterate our commitment to ensuring greater and
more meaningful participation and representation of Emerging Markets and Developing
Countries (EMDCs), as well as Least Developed Countries (LDCs), especially from
Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean, in global decision-making processes and
structures and making them better attuned to contemporary realities. We also call for
achieving equitable geographical representation in the Secretariat of the United Nations
and other international organizations in a timely manner, as well as increasing the role
and share of women, especially from EMDCs, at all levels of leadership and
responsibilities in these organizations. We stress the need for the selection and
appointment process of UN executive heads and senior positions to be guided by the
principles of transparency and inclusiveness, and carried out in accordance with all the
provisions of Article 101 of the UN Charter, with due regard for recruiting staff on a
geographical basis as wide as possible and the increased participation of women, and
adhere to the general rule that there should be no monopoly on senior posts in the UN
system by nationals of any State or group of States.
6. Recognizing the 2023 Johannesburg-II Leaders’ Declaration, we reiterate our support
for a comprehensive reform of the United Nations, including its Security Council, with a
view to making it more democratic, representative, effective and efficient, and to increase
the representation of developing countries in the Council’s memberships so that it can
adequately respond to prevailing global challenges and support the legitimate aspirations
of emerging and developing countries from Africa, Asia and Latin America, including
BRICS countries, to play a greater role in international affairs, in particular in the United
Nations, including its Security Council. We recognize the legitimate aspirations of
African countries, as reflected in the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration. We stress
that the United Nations Security Council reform is to lead to the amplified voice of the
Global South. Recalling the 2022 Beijing and 2023 Johannesburg-II Leaders’
Declarations, China and Russia, as permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council, reiterate their support to the aspirations of Brazil and India to play a greater role
in the United Nations, including its Security Council.
7. In light of the 80th Anniversary of the United Nations, we recall UNGA Resolutions
75/1, 77/335 and other relevant resolutions, and reiterate our commitment to provide the
United Nations with all the required support it needs to discharge its mandate. We
emphasize the strong call for reforms of the principal organs of the United Nations with
a view to achieving concrete progress. We recommit to instill new life in the discussions
on reform of the UN Security Council and continue the work to revitalize the General
Assembly and strengthen the Economic and Social Council. We look forward to the
successful conclusion of the 2025 Review of the Peacebuilding architecture.

--- Page 3 ---
8. We agree that, in the context of the contemporary realities of the multipolar world, it
is crucial that developing countries strengthen their efforts to promote dialogue and
consultations for more just and equitable global governance and mutually beneficial
relations among nations. We acknowledge that multipolarity can expand opportunities for
EMDCs to develop their constructive potential and enjoy universally beneficial, inclusive
and equitable economic globalization and cooperation. We highlight the importance of
the Global South as a driver for positive change, especially in the face of significant
international challenges, including deepening geopolitical tensions, rapid economic
downturns and technological changes, protectionist measures and migratory challenges. We
believe BRICS countries continue to play a pivotal role in voicing the concerns and
priorities of the Global South, as well as in promoting a more just, sustainable, inclusive,
representative and stable international order based on international law.
9. Recalling that 2025 marks the eightieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War,
a war which brought untold sorrow to humankind, particularly in Europe, Asia, Africa, the
Pacific and other parts of the world, we render our full support to the UNGA Resolution
79/272 on the Eightieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, on this historic
event, which established the conditions for the creation of the United Nations, designed to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
10. On the 80th anniversary, we reiterate the urgent need to reform the Bretton Woods
Institutions (BWI) to make them more agile, effective, credible, inclusive, fit for purpose,
unbiased, accountable, and representative, enhancing their legitimacy. First and foremost,
they must reform their governance structure to reflect the transformation of the global
economy since their establishment. The voice and representation of EMDEs in the BWI
must reflect their increasing weight in the global economy. Moreover, we call for
improved management procedures, including through a merit-based and inclusive
selection process that would increase regional diversity and representation of EMDEs in
the leadership of the IMF and the WBG, as well as the role and share of women at the
managerial level.
11. In the current context of uncertainty and volatility, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) must remain adequately resourced and agile, at the center of the global financial
safety net (GFSN), to effectively support its members, particularly the most vulnerable
countries. Despite the absence of quota realignment, we have provided consent to the
proposed quota increase under the 16th General Review of Quotas (GRQ) and urge IMF
members that have not yet done so to provide their consent and give effect to the quota
increases under the 16th GRQ with no further delay. We urge the IMF Executive Board
to fulfil the mandate set by the Board of Governors to develop approaches to quota share
realignment, including through a new quota formula, under the 17th GRQ at the earliest
possible time. We support the efforts of the IMF Executive Board and International
Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) Deputies in developing general principles to
guide future discussions and help foster convergence of views around the pressing quota
and governance reforms. We reiterate that further quota realignment in the IMF should
not come at the expense of developing countries, reflecting countries’ relative positions
in the global economy, and increasing the shares of EMDEs. In line with the BRICS Rio
de Janeiro Vision for IMF Quota and Governance Reform, we stand ready to engage
constructively with other IMF members to guarantee that meaningful quota share
realignment and governance reforms are included in the 17th GRQ.

--- Page 4 ---
12. We reaffirm that the 2025 World Bank Shareholding Review, co-chaired by Brazil,
is a critical tool to strengthen multilateralism and enhance the legitimacy of the World
Bank Group, as a better, bigger, and more effective development finance institution. In
line with the Lima principles, we continue to advocate for the increased voice and
representation of developing countries, underpinned by a shareholding realignment that
corrects their historic underrepresentation. We will endeavor to ensure that tackling
poverty and inequality, including through job creation, in the challenging context of
climate change and digitalization, remains central to the World Bank Group’s mission.
13. The multilateral trading system has long been at a crossroads. The proliferation of
trade-restrictive actions, whether in the form of indiscriminate rising of tariffs and non-
tariff measures, or protectionism under the guise of environmental objectives, threatens
to further reduce global trade, disrupt global supply chains, and introduce uncertainty into
international economic and trade activities, potentially exacerbating existing economic
disparities and affecting prospects for global economic development. We voice serious
concerns about the rise of unilateral tariff and non-tariff measures which distort trade and
are inconsistent with WTO rules. In this context, we reiterate our support for the rules-
based, open, transparent, fair, inclusive, equitable, non-discriminatory, consensus-based
multilateral trading system with the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core, with
special and differential treatment (S&DT) for its developing members. We emphasize
that the WTO, at its 30th anniversary, remains the only multilateral institution with the
necessary mandate, expertise, universal reach and capacity to lead on the multiple
dimensions of international trade discussions, including the negotiation of new trade
rules. We recall the commitment made at the 12th WTO Ministerial Conference and
reaffirmed at the 13th WTO Ministerial Conference to work towards a necessary reform
of the Organization to ensure its relevance and restore the credibility of the multilateral
trading system. We remain committed to the urgent restoration of an accessible, effective,
fully-functioning, two-tier binding WTO dispute settlement system. We strongly support
Ethiopia and Iran’s bid for accession to the WTO. We welcome the BRICS Declaration
on WTO Reform and Strengthening of the Multilateral Trading System adopted by the
Ministers of Trade.
14. We condemn the imposition of unilateral coercive measures that are contrary to
international law, and reiterate that such measures, inter alia in the form of unilateral
economic sanctions and secondary sanctions, have far-reaching negative implications for
the human rights, including the rights to development, health and food security, of the
general population of targeted states, disproportionally affecting the poor and people in
vulnerable situations, deepening the digital divide and exacerbating environmental
challenges. We call for the elimination of such unlawful measures, which undermine
international law and the principles and purposes of the UN Charter. We reaffirm that
BRICS member states do not impose or support non-UN Security Council authorized
sanctions that are contrary to international law.
15. Recognizing the interconnected nature of global health challenges and their
transboundary implications, we reaffirm our commitment to strengthening global health
governance by enhancing international cooperation and solidarity. We underscore the role
of the World Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority on
international health work within the UN System, particularly in times of crises and
emergencies, and emphasize the necessity of bolstering its mandate, capabilities, and
financing mechanisms. A robust and adequately funded WHO is essential to effectively

--- Page 5 ---
address current and future public health challenges, mitigate inequalities, and ensure
equitable access to healthcare services, including medicines, and vaccines for all,
particularly in developing countries. We commit to actively supporting efforts to
strengthen the global health architecture, fostering equality, inclusivity, transparency, and
responsiveness, ensuring no country is left behind in achieving health-related Sustainable
Development Goals. We acknowledge the adoption of the WHO Pandemic Agreement
by the 78th World Health Assembly. The Agreement will solidify the foundation for a
safer and more equitable world against future pandemics. We stand ready to carry this
momentum forward to ensure a timely conclusion of Member States-led and -driven
negotiations for the Agreement’s Annex on Pathogen Access and Benefit-Sharing.
16. We recognize that Artificial Intelligence (AI) represents a milestone opportunity to
boost development towards a more prosperous future. To achieve that goal, we
underscore that global governance of AI should mitigate potential risks and address the
needs of all countries, including those of the Global South. A collective global effort is
needed to establish an AI governance that upholds our shared values, addresses risks,
builds trust, and ensures broad and inclusive international collaboration and access, in
accordance with sovereign laws, including capacity building for developing countries,
with the United Nations at its core. To support a constructive debate towards a more
balanced approach, we agreed on the BRICS Leaders’ Statement on the Global
Governance of Artificial Intelligence, which aims to foster responsible development,
deployment, and use of AI technologies for sustainable development and inclusive
growth, in compliance with national regulatory frameworks, the UN Charter and
respecting the sovereignty of States.
Promoting Peace, Security and International Stability
17. We express concern about ongoing conflicts in many parts of the world and the current
state of polarization and fragmentation in the international order. We express alarm at the
current trend that has seen a critical increase in global military spending, to the detriment
of the provision of adequate financing for development to developing countries. We
advocate for a multilateral approach that respects diverse national viewpoints and
positions on crucial global issues, including sustainable development, the eradication of
hunger and poverty and contributing to the global response to climate change, while
expressing deep concern over attempts to link security with the climate change agenda.
18. We note the current global context of polarization and distrust and encourage global
action to strengthen international peace and security. We call on the international
community to respond to these challenges and associated security threats through
politico-diplomatic measures to lower conflict potential and stress the need to engage in
conflict prevention efforts, including through addressing their root causes. We underscore
that security among all countries is indivisible and reiterate our commitment to the
peaceful resolution of international disputes through dialogue, consultation and
diplomacy. We encourage the active role of regional organizations in conflict prevention
and resolution and support all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of crises. We
highlight the importance of mediation and preventive diplomacy as essential tools to
avoid crises and prevent their escalation, in accordance with the Purposes and Principles
of the UN Charter. In this regard, we agree to explore avenues for cooperation on the
prevention of armed conflicts, UN peacekeeping missions, African Union peace support
operations, and mediation and peace processes.

--- Page 6 ---
19. We reaffirm our strong commitment to strengthening multilateral cooperation to
address humanitarian crises worldwide and express concern at the dwindling of
international responses, which were already insufficient, fragmented and often
politicized. We strongly condemn all violations of international humanitarian law,
including deliberate attacks against civilians and civilian objects, including civilian
infrastructure, as well as the denial or obstruction of humanitarian access and the targeting
of humanitarian personnel. We underline the need to address accountability for all
violations of international humanitarian law. Such breaches of international law not only
intensify immediate suffering but also undermine prospects for lasting peace by
destroying the material and social foundations necessary for post-conflict reconstruction.
We recognize international efforts undertaken by BRICS members to promote respect
for, adherence to, and effective implementation of International Humanitarian Law.
20. We reiterate our commitment to the full implementation and advancement of the
Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda, especially in light of the 25th anniversary of
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000). We further reiterate the
importance of ensuring the full, equal, safe, and meaningful participation of women in
decision-making at all levels of peace and security processes, including conflict
prevention and resolution, humanitarian relief, mediation, peace operations,
peacebuilding, and post-conflict reconstruction and development.
21. We condemn the military strikes against the Islamic Republic of Iran since 13 June
2025, which constitute a violation of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, and express grave concern over the subsequent escalation of the security
situation in the Middle East. We further express serious concern over deliberate attacks
on civilian infrastructure and peaceful nuclear facilities under full safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in violation of international law and
relevant resolutions of the IAEA. Nuclear safeguards, safety, and security must always
be upheld, including in armed conflicts, to protect people and the environment from harm.
In this context, we reiterate our support for diplomatic initiatives aimed at addressing
regional challenges. We call upon the United Nations Security Council to be seized of
this matter.
22. We recall our national positions concerning the conflict in Ukraine as expressed in
the appropriate fora, including the UN Security Council and the UN General Assembly.
We note with appreciation relevant proposals of mediation and good offices, including
the creation of the African Peace Initiative and the Group of Friends for Peace, aimed at
peaceful resolution of the conflict through dialogue and diplomacy. We expect that
current efforts will lead to a sustainable peace settlement.
23. We are deeply concerned over continued conflicts and instability in the Middle East
and North Africa (MENA) region. In this regard, we endorse the Joint Statement by
BRICS Deputy Foreign Ministers and Special Envoys at their meeting of 28 March 2025.
24. We reiterate our grave concern about the situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, with the resumption of continuous Israeli attacks against Gaza and obstruction
of the entry of humanitarian aid into the territory. We call for adherence to international
law, in particular to international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and condemn all violations of IHL, including the use of starvation as a method of warfare.
We also condemn attempts to politicize or militarize humanitarian assistance. We exhort

--- Page 7 ---
the parties to engage in good faith in further negotiations to achieve an immediate,
permanent and unconditional ceasefire, the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza
Strip and all other parts of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the release of all hostages
and detainees held in violation of international law, and sustained and unhindered access
and delivery of humanitarian aid. We reassert our steadfast support for UNRWA and
stress the need to fully respect the mandate, bestowed on it by the UNGA, for the
provision of basic services to Palestine refugees in its five fields of operations. We call
on all relevant parties to respect their obligations under international law and act with
utmost restraint and to avoid escalatory actions and provocative declarations. We note, in
this regard, the provisional measures of the International Court of Justice in the legal
proceedings instituted by South Africa against Israel, which, inter alia, reaffirmed Israel’s
legal obligation to ensure the provision of humanitarian aid in Gaza.
25. We recall that the Gaza Strip is an inseparable part of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory. We underline, in this regard, the importance of unifying the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip under the Palestinian Authority, and reaffirm the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, including the right to their independent State of Palestine.
26. We call on the international community to support the Palestinian Authority in
undergoing reforms to fulfill the Palestinians’ legitimate aspirations for independence and
statehood, as well as the expeditious reconstruction of the civil infrastructure of the
territory, with a central role by the Palestinians, as agreed in the Emergency Arab Summit
on Palestine of 4 March 2025, and we note with appreciation the initiative to convene an
upcoming pledging conference to be held in Cairo. We underscore that efforts to stabilize
and rebuild Gaza must go hand in hand with a just and lasting political resolution of the
protracted conflict. We express our firm opposition to the forced displacement, temporary
or permanent, under any pretext, of any of the Palestinian population from the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, as well as any geographic or demographic changes to the territory
of the Gaza Strip. We reiterate that international law and international judicial bodies
demand the end of the illegal occupation and the immediate cessation of all practices that
undermine legal norms and obstruct a just and lasting peace.
27. We reaffirm that a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can only
be achieved by peaceful means and depends on the fulfillment of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, including the rights to self-determination and return. We reaffirm
our support for the State of Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations in the
context of the unwavering commitment to the two-state solution, in accordance with
international law, including relevant UN Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, and the Arab Peace Initiative, that includes the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine within the internationally recognized 1967
borders, which includes the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in order to achieve the vision of two States living side by side, in peace and
security. We affirm the need for adequate representation of Palestine in all relevant
international organizations, including multilateral financial institutions, and access to
their resources. We welcome the continued efforts by BRICS members towards an urgent
ceasefire, to accelerate the delivery of humanitarian aid and to achieve a lasting and
sustainable peace in the region.
28. We welcome the ceasefire in Lebanon and call on all parties to strictly adhere to its
terms and to fully implement UNSC Resolution 1701. We condemn the continued

--- Page 8 ---
violations of the ceasefire and of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. We
call on Israel to respect the terms agreed with the Lebanese government and to withdraw
its occupying forces from all of the Lebanese territory, including the five sites in Southern
Lebanon in which they remain.
29. We reaffirm our commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial
integrity of Syria and call for a peaceful and inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, UN-
facilitated political process, based on the principles of Security Council Resolution 2254
(2015), in a manner that ensures the security and well-being of the civilian population,
without discrimination. We condemn the violence perpetrated in various Syria’s
provinces among the country’s communities, the continuation of terrorist activities by
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda affiliates in Syria, including the recent bombing at Mar Elias
Church and Rif Dimashq, and express sincere condolences and sympathy to the families
of the victims of these terrorist attacks. We also condemn the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters’ presence in Syrian territory as well as the risk of spreading of terrorists
from Syria to regional countries. Syria should firmly oppose all forms of terrorism and
extremism and take concrete actions to respond to concerns of the international
community about terrorism. We welcome the lifting of unilateral sanctions on Syria and
hope that this will support efforts to revive the Syrian economy and launch the
reconstruction phase in a way that fosters development and stability. While condemning
strongly the occupation of parts of Syria, in blatant violation of international law and the
1974 disengagement, we urge Israel to withdraw its forces from the Syrian territory
without delay.
30. We reiterate that the principle “African solutions to African problems” should
continue to serve as the basis for conflict resolution on the African continent. We
recognize the critical role played by the African Union in conflict prevention,
management and resolution and reaffirm our support for African peace efforts on the
continent, including those undertaken by the African Union, and African sub-regional
organizations. In this sense, we commit to consider new ways to support African Union
peace support operations, mediation efforts, peace processes and broader peacebuilding
initiatives in the African continent.
31. We commend efforts and achievements by African countries and organizations in
their pursuit of lasting peace and sustainable development, while expressing serious
concern over the severe humanitarian crises resulting from new and protracted armed
conflicts in some regions of Africa, particularly the devastating effects of conflicts in
Sudan, the Great Lakes region, and the Horn of Africa. We reaffirm our support for efforts
aimed at finding political solutions to these crises, reiterate the call for an end to
hostilities, and emphasize the need for the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
32. We are deeply concerned over the situation in Sudan resulted in a humanitarian crisis
and the growing risk of proliferation of extremism and terrorism. We reiterate our
positions in this regard and call for an immediate, permanent, and unconditional ceasefire
and for a peaceful resolution of the conflict. We also stress the need for sustained, urgent
and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for the Sudanese population, and for
the scaling up of humanitarian aid to Sudan and neighboring countries
33. We remain seriously concerned with the ongoing deterioration of the security,
humanitarian, and economic situation in Haiti. We reaffirm that security and development

--- Page 9 ---
go hand in hand. The current crisis requires a Haitian-led solution that encompasses
national dialogue and consensus building among local political forces, institutions and
the society and we call on the international community to support the Haitian endeavors
to dismantle the gangs, enhance the security situation and put in place the foundations for
long-lasting social and economic development in the country. We support the role of the
United Nations and highlight the need for international cooperation to address Haiti’s
multifaceted crises effectively.
34. We express strong condemnation of any acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, whenever, wherever and by whomsoever committed. We
condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir on 22 April
2025, during which 26 people were killed and many more injured. We reaffirm our
commitment to combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including the
cross-border movement of terrorists, terrorism financing and safe havens. We reiterate
that terrorism should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group and that all those involved in terrorist activities and their support must be held
accountable and brought to justice in accordance with relevant national and international
law. We urge to ensure zero tolerance for terrorism and reject double standards in
countering terrorism. We emphasize the primary responsibility of States in combating
terrorism and that global efforts to prevent and counter terrorist threats must fully comply
with their obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the purposes and principles thereof, and relevant international
conventions and protocols, in particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law, as applicable. We welcome the activities
of the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Working Group (CTWG) and its five Subgroups based
upon the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Action Plan
and the CTWG position paper. We look forward to further deepening counter-terrorism
cooperation. We call for an expeditious finalization and adoption of the Comprehensive
Convention on International Terrorism in the UN framework. We call for concerted
actions against all UN designated terrorists and terrorist entities.
35. We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks against bridges and railways
infrastructure deliberately targeting civilians in Bryansk, Kursk and Voronezh regions of
the Russian Federation on 31 May, 1 and 5 June 2025, resulting in multiple civilian
casualties, including children.
36. We reiterate our commitment to preventing and combating illicit financial flows,
including money laundering and the financing of terrorism, extremism and proliferation,
as well as other forms of transnational organized crime, such as drug trafficking,
cybercrimes, crimes that affect the environment, illicit trafficking of firearms, trafficking
in persons, corruption and the use of new technologies, including cryptocurrencies, for
illegal, in particular terrorist, purposes. In this regard, we underscore the importance of
enhancing capacity-building and technical assistance, particularly for developing
countries, to support the implementation of relevant international obligations. We
reaffirm our commitment to the principles of technical and non-politicized nature of
international anti-criminal cooperation, including for the purpose of prevention and of
financial investigations. We note the need to further strengthen such cooperation,
including through relevant existing BRICS working groups, meetings of the BRICS
countries competent authorities and other forms of cooperation based on the documents
adopted in BRICS, as well as the relevant international legal instruments to which BRICS

--- Page 10 ---
countries are parties. We emphasize the importance of creating conditions for the safe
development of the younger generation, reducing the risk of their involvement in illegal
activities, and welcomed the development of relevant international projects with the
participation of young people.
37. We are resolute to promote BRICS cooperation in the prevention of and fight against
corruption, in line with relevant international agreements in this regard, in particular the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, and strengthen our coordination on major
issues on the international anti-corruption agenda. We attach importance to meeting the
BRICS anti-corruption commitments and to enhancing anti-corruption cooperation and
recovery and return of assets and proceeds of corruption. We welcome the work of the
BRICS Anti-Corruption Working Group to foster collaboration on anti-corruption
matters, in particular for sharing anti-corruption knowledge and expertise among
practitioners, including the formulation of the BRICS Common Vision and Joint Action
on Enhanced Anti-Corruption Cooperation and Recovery and Return of Assets and
Proceeds of Corruption, promotion of denial of safe haven and strengthening capacity-
building among the member countries.
38. We express concern about the growing risks of nuclear danger and conflict. We
reiterate the need for invigorating the system of disarmament, arms control and non-
proliferation and for preserving its integrity and effectiveness to achieve global stability
and international peace and security. We stress the significant contribution of nuclear-
weapon-free zones to the strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, reaffirm
our support for and respect towards all existing nuclear-weapons free-zones and their
associated assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and
acknowledge the paramount importance of the efforts aiming at accelerating the
implementation of the resolutions on the Establishment of a Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East, including the
Conference convened pursuant to UN General Assembly Decision 73/546. We call on all
invited parties to participate in this conference in good faith and engage with this effort
constructively. We welcome the adoption of the UNGA Resolution 79/241
“Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects”.
39. We recognize the need to ensure the use of space systems, as well as the achievements
of space science and technologies, for peaceful purposes. We also reassert our support for
ensuring the long-term sustainability of outer space activities and prevention of an arms
race in outer space (PAROS) and of its weaponization, as well as the threats or use of
force against outer space objects, including through negotiations to adopt a relevant legal
multilateral instrument to ensure global security. We recognize the submission of the
updated Draft Treaty on the Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space, the
Threat or Use of Force against Outer Space Objects (PPWT) to the Conference on
Disarmament in 2014 as an important step towards this goal. We stress that practical and
non-binding commitments such as Transparency and Confidence-Building Measures
(TCBMs), and universally agreed norms, rules, and principles may also contribute to
PAROS. We note the initiative of some BRICS Members at the General Assembly to
create a single Open-Ended Working Group to enable coherent, inclusive and effective
discussions that serves such purpose and undertake to engage constructively in the
process, on the basis of existing achievements, including on substantial elements on a
legally binding instrument on PAROS.

--- Page 11 ---
40. While emphasizing the potential of Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) to bridge the growing digital divides within and between countries, we
acknowledge challenges and threats stemming from and within the digital realm. We
reaffirm our commitment to the promotion of an open, secure, stable, accessible, peaceful,
and interoperable ICT environment. We underscore the leading role of the United Nations
in fostering constructive dialogue to forge common understandings on security in the use
of ICTs and discussions on developing a universal legal framework in this realm and the
further development and implementation of universally agreed norms, rules and
principles for responsible behavior of States in the use of ICTs. We call for a
comprehensive, balanced, objective approach to the development and security of ICT
products and systems as well as for the development and implementation of globally
interoperable common rules and standards for supply chain security. We commend the
ongoing work of the UN Open-ended Working Group on the Security of and in the Use
of ICTs 2021-2025 as the sole global and inclusive mechanism on this matter, and we
underline our common purpose to a successful finalization of its work this July. We
reaffirm our commitment to the establishment, by consensus, of a single-track, state-led,
permanent mechanism on this issue under the auspices of the United Nations, reporting
to the First Committee of the UNGA, recognizing the importance of the principle of
consensus regarding both the establishment of the future mechanism itself as well as the
decision-making processes of the mechanism. We also acknowledge the progress made
through the BRICS Working Group on Security in the Use of ICTs in areas such as policy
exchanges, cooperation between Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs), law
enforcement cooperation and joint research and development. In this regard, we welcome
the negotiation of the BRICS memoranda of understanding on law enforcement
cooperation and on multilateral cooperation among CERTs. We underscore the
importance of strengthening academic cooperation and sharing information on
opportunities for exchange programs, in line with the Roadmap of Practical Cooperation
on Ensuring Security in the Use of ICTs and its progress report.
41. We commend the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations
Convention against Cybercrime, a landmark multilateral achievement which will
constitute an effective tool and the necessary legal framework for international
cooperation in preventing and combating cybercrime and in ensuring the timely and
lawful collection and sharing of evidence in electronic form of any serious crimes that
may be committed through the use of ICT systems. We highlight the important
contribution of BRICS countries to its adoption since it was first proposed. We call upon
all States to sign it at the earliest opportunity, in Hanoi in 2025, and ratify it, in accordance
with domestic laws, processes and procedures, as soon as possible in order to ensure its
rapid entry into force, as well as to continue their engagement in the ad Hoc Committee,
in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 74/247 and 75/282, with a view to
negotiating a draft protocol supplementary to the Convention, addressing, inter alia,
additional criminal offences as appropriate.
Deepening International Economic, Trade and Financial Cooperation
42. We welcome the results of the “Strategy for BRICS Economic Partnership 2025”.
The Strategy provided guidance and set the framework for the BRICS cooperation and
collaboration on sectoral developments, strategies, programs and roadmaps by members.
We look forward to the conclusion and implementation of the Strategy for BRICS
Economic Partnership 2030, which will aim at consolidating mandates and guiding

--- Page 12 ---
principles for the cooperation of the BRICS on issues relating to Multilateral Trading
System, Digital Economy, International Trade, Financial Cooperation and Trade and
Sustainable Development.
43. As we commend the adoption of the BRICS Trade and Sustainable Development
Framework, we reaffirm our commitment to strengthen cooperation in trade with a view
to promoting inclusive growth and sustainable development. We reiterate the importance
of ensuring that trade and sustainable development policies are mutually supportive, and
aligned with WTO rules.
44. We welcome the discussions of the BRICS Task Force on PPPs and Infrastructure
regarding the mitigation of exchange rate risk and the preparation of projects for climate-
resilient infrastructure, aiming to improve project readiness and increase private
investment. Additionally, we welcome ongoing discussions on an information hub for
infrastructure projects that can foster collaboration and enhance information sharing, and
we encourage the Task Force to further explore this initiative.
45. As the New Development Bank is set to embark on its second golden decade of high-
quality development, we recognize and support its growing role as a robust and strategic
agent of development and modernization in the Global South. We welcome the Bank’s
steady expansion of its capacity to mobilize resources, foster innovation, expand local
currency financing, diversify funding sources, and support impactful projects that
advance sustainable development, reduce inequality, and promote infrastructure
investments and economic integration. We also acknowledge and encourage the ongoing
expansion of its membership and the strengthening of its governance framework, which
enhance the Bank’s institutional resilience and operational effectiveness, to continue
executing its purpose and functions in a fair and non-discriminatory manner. We strongly
support the further expansion of NDB membership and expedited consideration of
applications of interested BRICS countries, in line with the NDB General Strategy and
related policies. We fully support the leadership of President Dilma Rousseff, whose
reappointment received strong backing from all members, and we welcome the Bank’s
firm progress toward its consolidation as a global institution for development and
stability. This trajectory reflects our shared commitment to strengthening financial
mechanisms that promote inclusive and sustainable development in the Global South.
46. We welcome the valuable contribution of the BRICS Think Tank Network for Finance
(BTTNF) to foster collaboration among academia, policymakers, and leading researchers
and welcome the work program and the priorities defined within the group.
47. We welcome the constructive discussions held in the first semester of 2025 on the
concept of the New Investment Platform (NIP) and acknowledge the progress achieved
under the Brazilian Chairship. We look forward to the continuation of technical-level
efforts throughout the second semester of 2025, involving Finance Ministries and Central
Banks, to further discuss and build consensus on the Platform, with the aim that these
ongoing deliberations will pave the way for more consistent and meaningful progress.
48. We have commenced the discussions to establish a BRICS Multilateral Guarantees
(BMG) initiative, in response to our emphasis on strengthening financial resilience and
mobilizing private investment for infrastructure and sustainable development. The BMG
aims to offer tailored guarantee instruments to de-risk strategic investment and improve

--- Page 13 ---
creditworthiness in the BRICS and the Global South. Building on the lessons of
international experiences, we agreed on the guidelines to incubate the BMG within the
NDB as a pilot initiative, starting with its members, without additional capital
contributions. We look forward to developing this pilot initiative throughout 2025 with a
view to reporting on progress at the 2026 BRICS Summit.
49. We welcome the BRICS Interbank Cooperation Mechanism (ICM) focus on
facilitating and expanding innovative financial practices and approaches for projects and
programmes, including finding acceptable mechanisms of financing in local currencies.
We welcome a continued dialogue between the ICM and the NDB.
50. We task our ministers of finance and central bank governors, as appropriate, to
continue the discussion on the BRICS Cross-Border Payments Initiative, and
acknowledge the progress made by the BRICS Payment Task Force (BPTF) in identifying
possible pathways to support the continuation of discussions on the potential for greater
interoperability of BRICS payment systems. In this regard, we welcome the “Technical
Report: BRICS Cross-border Payments System”, which reflects members’ revealed
preferences, and should play a pivotal role in our efforts to facilitate fast, low-cost, more
accessible, efficient, transparent, and safe cross-border payments among BRICS countries
and other nations and which can support greater trade and investment flows.
51. We welcome discussions to enhance BRICS members’ (re)insurance capacity, with
the voluntary participation of relevant stakeholders, comprising regulators, reinsurance
companies from BRICS countries and the BRICS Business Council through the task force
endorsed by our Finance Ministers. We also encourage discussions to explore appropriate
formats for further technical dialogue on settlement and depositary infrastructure among
relevant stakeholders.
52. We acknowledge the continued collaboration under the BRICS Rapid Information
Security Channel (BRISC) on common priorities in information security and financial
technology. We also recognize the BRICS Fintech Innovation Hub’s role in advancing
cooperation on financial innovation and the responsible use of emerging technologies.
53. We welcome the progress on the Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA), including
the consensus reached by the Technical Team on the proposal for the revised Treaty and
regulations. We support efforts to enhance the CRA’s flexibility and effectiveness,
notably through the inclusion of eligible payment currencies and improved risk
management. We also value the participation of new BRICS members who have
expressed interest in joining the CRA and we are committed to onboarding them on a
voluntary basis and according to country-specific circumstances.
54. We commit to ensuring supply chain resilience, with particular attention to the needs
of developing countries, guided by the principles of efficiency, transparency,
modernization, inclusivity, and sustainability, in line with our respective national
sustainable development strategies. We recall the relevance of further promoting the
active engagement of the private sector, supporting the development and promotion of
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and fostering a more resilient and
dynamic global trade ecosystem. We intend to further exchange best practices of
supporting MSMEs, including through digital services and platforms aimed at
simplifying business operations.

--- Page 14 ---
55. We welcome the initiative of the Brazilian Chairship to launch the BRICS Seminar
on Sustainable Government Procurement as a platform for knowledge exchange and
South-South cooperation. We acknowledge the strategic role of government procurement
in facilitating economic and trade cooperation, promoting sustainable development,
supporting industrial policy, and promoting inclusive growth. We note with appreciation
the engagement of BRICS and partner countries in sharing national experiences, policy
innovations, and challenges related to the use of procurement as a development tool. We
encourage the continuity of this regular dialogue under future Chairships.
56. We reaffirm our support of the Kimberley Process (KP) as the sole global
intergovernmental certification scheme, regulating trade in rough diamonds, and
emphasize our commitment to preventing conflict diamonds from entering the markets.
We welcome the UAE’s efforts as custodian chair of the Kimberley Process in 2025 and
commend ongoing efforts to promote sustainable development of the global diamond
industry. We will continue to examine viable mechanisms to promote trade in diamond
and precious metals within BRICS and in the global market.
57. We acknowledge that the Partnership on the New Industrial Revolution (PartNIR)
serves as a guiding platform to identify interests, challenges, and opportunities in the
rapidly evolving industrial landscape and capacity building in the field of industry while
supporting the continuity of BRICS industrial cooperation through a structured
framework for sustained collaboration. In this regard, we commend the approval of the
Terms of Reference for the Intelligent Manufacturing and Robotics Working Group, the
Digital Transformation of Industry Working Group and the Small and Medium
Enterprises Working Group. We also commend the approval of the first BRICS SME
Working Group Plan of Action (2025–2030), which represents a significant milestone in
advancing structured cooperation in the SME sector among BRICS countries. We
welcome the launch of the BRICS Center for Industrial Competences (BCIC) in
cooperation with United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) to
jointly support the development of Industry 4.0 skills among the BRICS countries and to
promote partnerships and increased productivity in the New Industrial Revolution. We
encourage members to join the BCIC to participate in the BCIC’s activities, including the
registration of companies on its electronic platform for further BRICS partnerships. We
also welcome the establishment of the China Centre for BRICS Industrial Competences
(CCBIC). We appreciate the efforts of the BRICS PartNIR Innovation Center (BPIC) in
organizing events including BRICS Forum on PartNIR, BRICS Industrial Innovation
Contest, BRICS Exhibition on New Industrial Revolution, and the BPIC Training
Programmes over the past 5 years, and welcome the establishment of the scholarship of
BPIC Training Programmes. We acknowledge that under the Brazilian Chairship, the
BRICS Artificial Intelligence High-Level Forum, co-hosted by China and organized by
China-BRICS Artificial Intelligence Development and Cooperation Center, has been held
in Brasilia during the 9th BRICS Industry Ministers Meeting. We recognize the progress
achieved in the implementation of the BRICS Action Plan for Innovation 2021-2024,
which included the launching of the BRICS Startup Forum in January 2025, under the
leadership of India, and appreciate the launch of its BRICS Startup Knowledge Hub, to
foster collaboration and deeper engagement among the startup ecosystems of the BRICS
countries.

--- Page 15 ---
58. Recognising the importance of creating an enabling, inclusive, and secure digital
economy and that digital connectivity is an essential prerequisite for digital
transformation as well as social and economic growth, we emphasize the need to
strengthen cooperation among BRICS countries. We acknowledge that resilient, safe,
inclusive and interoperable digital public infrastructure has the potential to deliver
services at scale and increase social and economic opportunities for all.
59. We encourage BRICS members to explore the possibility for joint action in the field
of digital infrastructure to ensure the integrity, stability of the functioning and security of
national segments of Internet while avoiding Internet fragmentation and respecting
national legislative frameworks regarding any aspects of Internet use, including security
ones.
60. We appreciate the efforts by the Brazilian Chairship in organizing the Webinar on
Digital Transformation and Meaningful Connectivity, and encourage continued
knowledge sharing and policy exchange to facilitate the adoption of ICTs to ensure
inclusive, accessible and scalable digital services, across different sectors such as
agriculture, manufacturing, transportation, health, education and financing, tailored to
different needs of each country. We appreciate the efforts made by India for organizing
the Capacity Building Sessions on Digital Transformation in BRICS as a side-event and
encourage BRICS members to continue promoting side events.
61. We acknowledge the holding of the BRICS Forum on Future Networks Innovation in
2025, hosted by China and Brazil. We welcome the adoption of the Terms of Reference
of the Study Groups on AI, Next Generation Communications, Internet Application in
Industry 4.0 and EMF Exposure by the Council of the BRICS Institute of Future Networks
as well as the nomination of their chairs and vice-chairs. We look forward to the concrete
outcomes by these BIFN Study Groups. We also acknowledge the progress made on the
issue of Child Online Protection, including the development of new mechanisms to
enhance cooperation in this field through the exchange of knowledge and best practice
among member states. We appreciate the efforts by the Brazilian Chairship in organizing
the panel discussion on digital public goods and digital public infrastructure, during the
Digital BRICS Forum, and encourage continued knowledge sharing and policy exchange.
We also note the holding of meeting of the Focus Group on Digital Public Infrastructure,
and welcome the adoption of its Terms of Reference.
62. We reaffirm our commitment to make joint efforts to achieve the rational, efficient,
equitable, fair, effective and economical use of spectrum and associated satellite orbits,
we encourage further cooperation among BRICS members to facilitate cooperation on
space sustainability. We note with satisfaction that the Brazilian chairship will produce a
report with proposals on future BRICS work on Sustainable Space Connectivity
Resources for consideration and future actions. We affirm that the technical reach of
space telecommunications systems should not bypass state sovereignty in any case, and
the provision of satellite services within the territory of a state should be carried out only
if authorized by that state. We welcome the development of the BRICS White Paper on
Sustainable Space Connectivity Resources.
63. We recognize the importance of international cooperation for the peaceful exploration
and uses of outer space and reiterate our commitment to reducing existing asymmetries
in space capabilities among BRICS countries. We recognize that strengthening the

--- Page 16 ---
exchange of data, expertise and best practices in space activities constitutes an important
element in advancing ongoing cooperation between our space agencies and fostering
sustainable progress. We welcome the proposal for a collaborative newsletter as a
mechanism to facilitate information exchange and promote capacity building initiatives.
We agree, in principle, to establish the BRICS Space Council and to continue working on
its Terms of Reference to facilitate further cooperation in the field of space activities
within the group. We note that agencies have agreed to advance discussions on a joint
observation exercise to support UNFCCC COP30.
64. We underscore the key role of the G20 as the premier global forum for international
economic cooperation that provides a platform for dialogue of both developed and
emerging economies on an equal and mutually beneficial footing for jointly seeking
shared solutions to global challenges and fostering multipolar world. We recognize the
importance of the continued and productive functioning of the G20, based on consensus
and with a focus on result-oriented outcomes. We reiterate our strong support to the South
African presidency and look forward to the successful hosting of the G20 Leaders’
Summit in Johannesburg in November 2025 under the South African Presidency and
reaffirm our willingness to coordinate positions in order to enhance inclusiveness and
amplify the voice of the Global South in the global economic governance system so it
adequately reflects EMDEs’ rising weight in the global economy and further integrate
their priorities in the G20 agenda through the consecutive G20 presidencies of BRICS
member states – Indonesia, India, Brazil and South Africa – during 2022-2025 and
beyond. We salute strengthening of the EMDEs’ voice in the G20 through the accession
of the African Union during India’s presidency of G20 in 2023 and the invitation of the
NDB during Brazilian and South African presidencies including by their closer
interaction and alignment.
65. We note that high debt levels in some countries reduce the fiscal space needed to
address ongoing development challenges aggravated by spillover effects from external
shocks, particularly from fluctuations in financial and monetary policies in some
advanced economies as well as the inherent problems with the international financial
architecture. High interest rates and tighter financing conditions worsen debt
vulnerabilities in many countries. We believe it is necessary to address the international
debt properly and in a holistic manner to support economic recovery and sustainable
development, taking into account each nation’s laws and internal procedures,
accompanied by sustainable external debt and fiscal prudence. We recognise the need to
address in an effective, comprehensive and systematic manner the debt vulnerabilities of
both low and middle income countries. One of the instruments, amongst others, to
collectively address debt vulnerabilities is through predictable, orderly, timely and
coordinated implementation of the G20 Common Framework for Debt Treatment with
the participation of official bilateral creditors, private creditors and Multilateral
Development Banks (MDBs) in line with the principle of joint action and fair burden-
sharing. We remain engaged in enhancing coordination between debtors and official
bilateral, multilateral and private creditors to help Emerging Markets and Developing
Economies (EMDEs) address debt issues in a fair and constructive way from a
development perspective.
66. Recognizing the central role of data to modern life as a catalyst for innovation-driven
development and the formulation of informed and inclusive public policies, we reaffirm
the need for a common and principle-based interoperable framework on data governance,

--- Page 17 ---
including respect for national data sovereignty, efficient, convenient, safe and mutually
agreed cross-border data flows and ethical use of data, to address the principles of
collection, recording, storage, organization, processing and transfer of data; protect
personal information rights and interests, including individual privacy; promote the
interoperability of national data policy regulations; and distribute the monetary and non-
monetary benefits of data among developing countries and their citizens. In this regard,
we welcome the conclusion of the “BRICS Data Economy Governance Understanding”
as a roadmap to leverage the data economy across BRICS in order to promote safe access
to technology, safeguard individual and national interests, promote the digitalization of
industry and services, expansion of intra-BRICS trade.
67. We emphasize that e-commerce has become an important driver of global economic
growth, fostering international trade in goods and services, ensuring foreign investment
flows and facilitating innovation. We are resolved to further increase trust in e-commerce
and ensure full-fledged protection of the rights of e-commerce parties, by intensifying
cooperation in the realms of utilizing digital technologies for consumer rights protection,
exploring online dispute resolution tools and creating enabling environment for
businesses to enter global markets, exchanging views on the issue of small value product
trade through the cross-border e-commerce.
68. We continue to recognise the effectiveness of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) of the
BRICS countries as a well-established mechanism for trade and industrial cooperation
and the facilitation of manufacturing, including those but not limited to high-tech sectors
of the economy, IT and IT enabled services, tourism, port and transport infrastructure,
development and commercialization of technologies as well as for the production of new
types of value-added products. We also acknowledge that Special Economic Zones
provide immense opportunities for encouraging additional investment in priority areas of
economic development and recognize the potential of SEZs as a tool to stimulate
economic growth and create new job opportunities, specially, but not limited to, in high
tech and infrastructure sectors.
69. We recognize that BRICS countries are key players in world food production and, as
such, have a critical role in enhancing agricultural productivity and sustainability, and
ensuring global food security and nutrition. We also recognize that family farmers,
including smallholders, pastoralists, artisanal and small-scale fishers and aquaculture
producers, indigenous peoples and local communities, women and youth, are essential
stakeholders of agriculture and food systems. We welcome ongoing efforts to promote
sustainability, inclusivity, and equitable market access in the global sustainable vegetable
oils sector. We call for continued collaboration among BRICS countries and partners to
support smallholder farmers, ensure fair pricing, and foster resilient and sustainable
agricultural value chains. We recognize that mechanization and technological innovation
in small-scale agriculture, including information and digital innovations, are strategic
opportunities for reducing the drudgery of work, increasing productivity and income,
enhancing resilience, and accelerating the sustainable transition.
70. We emphasize the importance of ensuring food security and nutrition and mitigating
the impacts of acute food price volatility, as well as abrupt supply crises, including
fertilizers shortage. In this regard, we acknowledge the importance of continued
elaboration of the initiative to establish a grain trading platform within BRICS (the
BRICS Grain Exchange) and its subsequent development, and expanding into other
agricultural products and commodities. We support further discussions on national

--- Page 18 ---
policies and on international coordination that enhance food availability, accessibility,
utilization, stability and affordability, as well as relevant agricultural and food production
inputs in BRICS and other developing countries – including those that strengthen national
capacities to respond to supply disruptions, such as national food reserve systems. Under
exceptional circumstances of supply shortages or acute food price spikes affecting a
BRICS member, we recognize that cooperation initiatives can facilitate emergency
responses and natural disaster management, guided by national priorities and consistent
with the World Trade Organization rules. None of these measures should lead to unfair
trade practices or violations of international trade norms, as their sole purpose is to
support food security and nutrition, including through international solidarity. We
recognize the importance of reducing food loss and waste, and ensuring animal and plant
health through joint prevention and control of dangerous diseases and pests, including by
increasing transparency in the movement of food and feed, with an unified electronic
certification system for animal and plant products as an important tool.
71. We call for further cooperation in agriculture, fisheries and aquaculture in order to
end hunger and eliminate all forms of malnutrition and eradicate poverty, promote
sustainable agriculture and rural development, through implement technologies and
innovation, and ensure food security, incentivize investments in the local production of
machinery and equipment that is tailored to the specific needs and affordable for small-
scale and family farmers as well as fisheries and aquaculture workers. Building on the
Deccan High-Level Principles on Food Security and Nutrition, we also recognize the
Global Alliance Against Hunger and Poverty as an important initiative to promote
international cooperation. We also look forward to advance discussions on facilitating
intra-BRICS trade of agricultural products, agricultural and food production inputs, and
improve value chains and sustainable agricultural practices. We reaffirm the need to
develop a fair agricultural trading system and implement resilient and sustainable
agriculture. We commit to minimize disruptions and promote rules-based trade in
agriculture and fertilizers with the view to ensure a continuous flow of food and essential
inputs for agricultural production which should be exempted from undue restrictive
economic measures, inconsistent with WTO rules, including those affecting producers
and exporters of agricultural products as well as business services with regard to
international shipments. We welcome the launch of the BRICS Partnership for Land
Restoration, in line with the framework of the UNCCD, and the first BRICS AWG Report
on the Contributions to Implementing the Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty.
72. We reaffirm our commitment to further advance and develop cooperation in the field
of competition law and policy among BRICS countries with a view to contribute to
sustainable development of markets, effective combatting anticompetitive crossborder
practices, promoting healthy market environment. We acknowledge the role of the
BRICS International Competition Law and Policy Center activities in knowledge creation
and knowledge sharing amongst BRICS competition authorities and the importance to
ensure the most favorable conditions for the competition law development of BRICS
economies and work towards the elimination of monopoly barriers in socially important
markets. We welcome holding of the IX BRICS International Competition Conference in
2025 in South Africa.
73. We welcome the adoption of the Brasilia Declaration of the Meeting of Heads of
BRICS National standardization bodies, which acknowledges the significant benefits of
cooperation in this field, including the facilitation of economic relations and trade, the
advancement of consumer safety, and the promotion of sustainable development. We

--- Page 19 ---
encourage the timely conclusion of the negotiations of the Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation in the Field of Standardization, as the next milestone
towards fostering standardization and metrology as effective tools to help eliminate
barriers to trade and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services.
74. We commend the continuous exchange of best practices between the Supreme Audit
Institutions of the BRICS countries. Taking into account the role of SAIs in promoting
good governance and effectiveness of public policies, we recognize the importance of
SAIs’ taking full advantage of the opportunities offered by the digital technologies,
including the AI, in their work, while minimizing the risks created by these technologies.
75. Recognizing the importance of official statistics for effective decision-making, we
express our support to enhance the statistical cooperation within BRICS, including the
annual release of the BRICS Joint Statistical Publication and the BRICS Joint Statistical
Publication Snapshot, as well as exchange of best practices in the areas of official
statistics in the BRICS countries.
76. We will continue to cooperate to promote a fair, more inclusive, stable, and efficient
international tax system fit for the 21st century. We restate our commitment to tax
transparency and to fostering global dialogue on effective and fair taxation, enhancing
progressivity and contributing to the efforts to reduce inequality. We aim to deepen global
coordination between tax authorities, improve domestic revenue mobilization, provide
fair allocation of taxing rights and combat tax evasion and tax-related illicit financial
flows. In this regard, we welcome the BRICS Joint Statement in support of the United
Nations Framework Convention on International Tax Cooperation and will continue to
engage constructively in the negotiations of the UN Convention and its protocols. We
welcome the progress in customs cooperation, notably the initiatives for implementing
the Joint Action Plan towards Mutual Recognition of the Authorized Economic Operator
programs, subject to such exceptions, modifications or adaptations as agreed on
bilaterally. A key development in customs cooperation is the establishment of BRICS
Customs Centers of Excellence and the development of Smart Customs, which we will
continue to encourage.
77. We highlight the fruitful cooperation carried out under IP BRICS by Intellectual
Property (IP) Offices. We support achieving more practical outcomes under 8 cooperation
streams such as promotion of IP awareness and examiners’ training guided by the
Operational Guideline Framework, seeking a strong contribution for IP to economic and
social development. We welcome the adoption of the WIPO Treaty on Intellectual
Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge and the Riyadh
Design Law Treaty on which BRICS countries have considerable interest and commit to
enhanced collaboration among BRICS countries. We recognize the importance of
collaborating on promoting respect for the intellectual property rights used in the digital
environment, including for artificial intelligence training purposes, as well as fair
remuneration to right holders, while respecting the needs and priorities of developing
countries. With the rise of application of AI, we recognize risks relating to
misappropriation and misrepresentation of knowledge, heritage, and cultural values that
are insufficiently represented in data sets and AI models.
78. We celebrate the ten-year milestone of cooperation in Science, Technology and
Innovation (STI) within BRICS, acknowledging the significant achievements made since

--- Page 20 ---
the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in STI, in 2015, by the
STI Ministers of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. We welcome the ongoing
process of incorporation of new members to the Memorandum through its Accession
Protocol. We reaffirm that the ultimate purpose of BRICS cooperation in STI is to forge
new productive forces for development of BRICS countries and advance sustainable
development in its three dimensions, through a partnership rooted in collaboration,
contributing to the strengthening of friendship, mutual understanding, and peaceful
relations among BRICS nations.
79. We commend the work of the BRICS STI Working Groups. We appreciate the
Brazilian proposal to consider artificial intelligence, quantum technologies and
innovation in industry as priorities in 2025, in a novel context of rapid advancement of
emerging technologies and national reindustrialization processes. We welcome the
BRICS Action Plan for Innovation 2025–2030, as well as the launching of the seventh
Joint Call for Research Projects and the first Joint Call for Innovation Projects. We
welcome the Brazilian proposal to discuss the undertaking, in 2025, of a “Technical and
Economic Feasibility Study” for establishing a high-speed communication network
though submarine cables between BRICS countries. We encourage all BRICS members
to promote the participation of young scientists and startups through initiatives such as
the Young Scientists Forum, which comes to its 10th edition this year, and the Young
Innovators Prize. We welcome advancing the cooperative agenda of deep-sea joint
research, including the elaboration of the terms of reference that will complete the
establishment of the BRICS Deep-Sea Resource International Research Center. We
reaffirm commitment to develop cooperation in the field of humanities and welcome the
holding of the Forum on social sciences and humanities research in Russia in 2025.
80. Acknowledging that the BRICS countries have immense potential in the tourism
sector and offer promising possibilities for the growth and development of sustainable
and resilient tourism, including ecotourism – further enhanced by membership expansion
in 2024, which provided new opportunities for collaboration and for boosting intra-
BRICS travel –, we welcome the results of the Tourism Working Group, notably: the
promotion of Regional Tourism strategies to strengthen synergies and complementarities
among member states; the advancement of Sustainable, Resilient and Regenerative
Tourism as a means to tackle shared challenges; and the formulation of strategic
guidelines to harness the potential of Digital Nomads as agents of local development and
cultural exchange. We reaffirm our commitment to expanding BRICS cooperation,
fostering innovation, and ensuring that tourism contributes meaningfully to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Combating Climate Change and Promoting Sustainable, Fair and Inclusive
Development
81. We stress our commitment to uphold multilateralism as necessary to address
challenges threatening our shared planet and future such as climate change. We resolve
to remain united in the pursuit of the purpose and goals of the Paris Agreement and the
objectives of the UNFCCC and call on all countries to uphold their existing commitment
as Parties to the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement and to maintain and scale up their
effort to combat climate change. We further reaffirm our steadfast commitment, in pursuit
of the objective of UNFCCC, to tackle climate change by strengthening the full and
effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, including its provisions related to

