--- Page 1 ---
XV BRICS Summit
Johannesburg II Declaration
BRICS and Africa: Partnership for Mutually Accelerated Growth,
Sustainable Development and Inclusive Multilateralism
Sandton, Gauteng, South Africa
Wednesday 23 August 2023
Preamble
1. We, the Leaders of the Federative Republic of Brazil, the Russian Federation, the
Republic of India, the People's Republic of China and the Republic of South Africa met
in Sandton, South Africa, from 22 to 24 August 2023 for the XV BRICS Summit held
under the theme: "BRICS and Africa: Partnership for Mutually Accelerated Growth,
Sustainable Development and Inclusive Multilateralism".
2. We reaffirm our commitment to the BRICS spirit of mutual respect and
understanding, sovereign equality, solidarity, democracy, openness, inclusiveness,
strengthened collaboration and consensus. As we build upon 15 years of BRICS
Summits, we further commit ourselves to strengthening the framework of mutually
beneficial BRICS cooperation under the three pillars of political and security, economic
and financial, and cultural and people-to-people cooperation and to enhancing our
strategic partnership for the benefit of our people through the promotion of peace, a
more representative, fairer international order, a reinvigorated and reformed
multilateral system, sustainable development and inclusive growth.
Partnership for Inclusive Multilateralism
3. We reiterate our commitment to inclusive multilateralism and upholding
international law, including the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
1

--- Page 2 ---
the United Nations (UN) as its indispensable cornerstone, and the central role of the
UN in an international system in which sovereign states cooperate to maintain peace
and security, advance sustainable development, ensure the promotion and protection
of democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and promoting
cooperation based on the spirit of solidarity, mutual respect, justice and equality.
4. We express concern about the use of unilateral coercive measures, which are
incompatible with the principles of the Charter of the UN and produce negative effects
notably in the developing world. We reiterate our commitment to enhancing and
improving global governance by promoting a more agile, effective, efficient,
representative, democratic and accountable international and multilateral system.
5. We call for greater representation of emerging markets and developing
countries, in international organizations and multilateral fora in which they play an
important role. We also call for increasing the role and share of women from EMDCs
at different levels of responsibilities in the international organizations.
6. We reiterate the need for all countries to cooperate in promoting and protecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms under the principles of equality and mutual
respect. We agree to continue to treat all human rights including the right to
development in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis. We agree to strengthen cooperation on issues of common interests both
within BRICS and in multilateral fora including the United Nations General Assembly
and Human Rights Council, taking into account the necessity to promote, protect and
fulfil human rights in a non-selective, non-politicised and constructive manner and
without double standards. We call for the respect of democracy and human rights. In
this regard, we underline that they should be implemented on the level of global
governance as well as at national level. We reaffirm our commitment to ensuring the
promotion and protection of democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all with the aim to build a brighter shared future for the international community based
on mutually beneficial cooperation.
7. We support a comprehensive reform of the UN, including its Security Council,
with a view to making it more democratic, representative, effective and efficient, and
to increase the representation of developing countries in the Council’s memberships
so that it can adequately respond to prevailing global challenges and support the
2

--- Page 3 ---
legitimate aspirations of emerging and developing countries from Africa, Asia and
Latin America, including Brazil, India and South Africa, to play a greater role in
international affairs, in particular in the United Nations, including its Security Council.
8. We reaffirm our support for the open, transparent, fair, predictable, inclusive,
equitable, non-discriminatory and rules-based multilateral trading system with the
World Trade Organisation (WTO) at its core, with special and differential treatment
(S&DT) for developing countries, including Least Developed Countries. We stress our
support to work towards positive and meaningful outcomes on the issues at the 13th
Ministerial Conference (MC13). We commit to engage constructively to pursue the
necessary WTO reform with a view to presenting concrete deliverables to MC13. We
call for the restoration of a fully and well-functioning two-tier binding WTO dispute
settlement system accessible to all members by 2024, and the selection of new
Appellate Body Members without further delay.
9. We call for the need to make progress towards the achievement of a fair and
market-oriented agricultural trading system, ending hunger, achieving food security
and improved nutrition, promoting sustainable agriculture and food systems, and
implement resilient agricultural practices. We emphasize the need to deliver on
agriculture reform in accordance with the mandate in Article 20 of the Agreement on
Agriculture, while recognizing the importance of respecting the mandates with
regards to a Permanent Solution on Public Stockholding (PSH) for food security
purposes and special safeguard mechanism (SSM) for developing countries, including
LDCs, in their respective negotiating contexts. BRICS members are also concerned with
trade restrictive measures which are inconsistent with WTO rules, including unilateral
illegal measures such as sanctions, that affect agricultural trade.
10. We support a robust Global Financial Safety Net with a quota-based and
adequately resourced International Monetary Fund (IMF) at its centre. We call for the
conclusion of the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) 16th General Review of Quotas
before 15 December 2023. The review should restore the primary role of quotas in the
IMF. Any adjustment in quota shares should result in increases in the quota shares of
emerging markets and developing economies (EMDCs), while protecting the voice and
representation of the poorest members. We call for reform of the Bretton Woods
institutions, including for a greater role for emerging markets and developing
countries, including in leadership positions in the Bretton Woods institutions, that
3

--- Page 4 ---
reflect the role of EMDCs in the world economy.
Fostering an Environment of Peace and Development
11. We welcome the Joint Statement of the BRICS Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
International Relations meeting on 1 June 2023 and note the 13th Meeting of BRICS
National Security Advisors and High Representatives on National Security held on 25
July 2023.
12. We are concerned about ongoing conflicts in many parts of the world. We stress
our commitment to the peaceful resolution of differences and disputes through
dialogue and inclusive consultations in a coordinated and cooperative manner and
support all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of crises.
13. We recognise the importance of the increased participation of women in peace
processes including in conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and development, and sustaining peace.
14. We stress our commitment to multilateralism and to the central role of the United
Nations which are prerequisites to maintain peace and security. We call on the
international community to support countries in working together towards post-
pandemic economic recovery. We emphasise the importance of contributing to post-
conflict countries’ reconstruction and development and call upon the international
community to assist countries in meeting their development goals. We stress the
imperative of refraining from any coercive measures not based on international law
and the UN Charter.
15. We reiterate the need for full respect of international humanitarian law in conflict
situations and the provision of humanitarian aid in accordance with the basic
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence established in UNGA
resolution 46/182.
16. We commend continued collective efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and sub-regional organisations, including in particular the cooperation between
the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
to address regional challenges including maintaining peace and security, promoting
peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and development, and call for continued
4

--- Page 5 ---
support by the international community to these endeavours using diplomatic means
such as dialogue, negotiations, consultations, mediation, and good offices, to resolve
international disputes and conflicts, settle them on the basis of mutual respect,
compromise, and the balance of legitimate interests. We reiterate that the principle
“African solutions to African problems” should continue to serve as the basis for
conflict resolution. In this regard we support African peace efforts on the continent by
strengthening the relevant capacities of African States. We are concerned about the
worsening violence in Sudan. We urge the immediate cessation of hostilities and call
for the unimpeded access of the Sudanese population to humanitarian assistance. We
remain concerned at the situation in the Sahel region, in particular in the Republic of
Niger. We support the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Libya. We reiterate our support for a “Libyan led and Libyan-owned” political
process with UN-led mediation as the main channel. We emphasize the need to
achieve an enduring and mutually acceptable political solution to the question of
Western Sahara in accordance with relevant UNSC resolutions and in fulfilment of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO).
17. We welcome the positive developments in the Middle East and the efforts by
BRICS countries to support development, security and stability in the region. In this
regard, we endorse the Joint Statement by the BRICS Deputy Foreign Ministers and
Special Envoys for the Middle East and North Africa at their meeting of 26 April 2023.
We welcome the reestablishment of diplomatic relations between the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran and emphasise that deescalating
tensions and managing differences through dialogue and diplomacy is key to peaceful
coexistence in this strategically important region of the world. We reaffirm our support
for Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity, and commend the
positive role of all the parties involved in bringing about a ceasefire and seeking a
political solution to end the conflict. We call on all parties to engage in inclusive direct
negotiations and to support the provision of humanitarian, relief and development
assistance to the Yemeni people. We support all efforts conducive to a political and
negotiated solution that respects Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity and the
promotion of a lasting settlement to the Syrian crisis. We welcome the readmission of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the League of Arab States. We express our deep concern
at the dire humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territories due to
5

--- Page 6 ---
escalating violence under continued Israeli occupation and the expansion of illegal
settlements. We call on the international community to support direct negotiations
based on international law including relevant UN Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, towards a two-state solution,
leading to the establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine.
We commend the extensive work carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and call for greater
international support for UNRWA activities to alleviate the humanitarian situation of
the Palestinian people.
18. We express serious concern with the ongoing deterioration of the security,
humanitarian, political and economic situation in Haiti. We believe that the current
crisis requires a Haitian-led solution that encompasses national dialogue and
consensus building among local political forces, institutions and the society. We call
on the international community to support the Haitian endeavours to dismantle the
gangs, enhance the security situation and put in place the foundations for long-lasting
social and economic development in the country.
19. We recall our national positions concerning the conflict in and around Ukraine as
expressed at the appropriate fora, including the UNSC and UNGA. We note with
appreciation relevant proposals of mediation and good offices aimed at peaceful
resolution of the conflict through dialogue and diplomacy, including the African
Leaders Peace Mission and the proposed path for peace.
20. We call for the strengthening of disarmament and non-proliferation, including
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction (BTWC) and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC), recognizing its role in
safeguarding and for preserving their integrity and effectiveness to maintain global
stability and international peace and security. We underline the need to comply with
and strengthen the BTWC, including by adopting a legally binding Protocol to the
Convention that provides for, inter alia, an efficient verification mechanism. We
reassert our support for ensuring the long-term sustainability of outer space activities
and prevention of an arms race in outer space (PAROS) and of its weaponization,
including through negotiations to adopt a relevant legally binding multilateral
6

--- Page 7 ---
instrument. We recognise the value of the updated Draft Treaty on the Prevention of
the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of Force against Outer
Space Objects (PPWT) submitted to the Conference on Disarmament in 2014. We
stress that practical and non-binding commitments, such as Transparency and
Confidence-Building Measures (TCBMs), may also contribute to PAROS.
21. We reiterate the need to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue through peaceful and
diplomatic means in accordance with the international law, and stress the importance
of preserving the JCPOA and the UNSCR 2231 to international non-proliferation as
well as wider peace and stability and hope for relevant parties to restore the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA at an early date.
22. We express strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
whenever, wherever and by whomsoever committed. We recognize the threat
emanating from terrorism, extremism conducive to terrorism and radicalization. We
are committed to combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including
the cross-border movement of terrorists, and terrorism financing networks and safe
havens. We reiterate that terrorism should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to
contribute further to the global efforts of preventing and countering the threat of
terrorism on the basis of respect for international law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations, and human rights, emphasizing that States have the primary
responsibility in combating terrorism with the United Nations continuing to play
central and coordinating role in this area. We also stress the need for a comprehensive
and balanced approach of the whole international community to effectively curb the
terrorist activities, which pose a serious threat, including in the present-day pandemic
environment. We reject double standards in countering terrorism and extremism
conducive to terrorism. We call for an expeditious finalization and adoption of the
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism within the UN framework and
for launching multilateral negotiations on an international convention for the
suppression of acts of chemical and biological terrorism, at the Conference of
Disarmament. We welcome the activities of the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Working
Group and its five Subgroups based upon the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Action Plan. We look forward to further deepening
counter-terrorism cooperation.
7

--- Page 8 ---
23. While emphasising the formidable potential of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICTs) for growth and development, we recognise the existing and
emerging possibilities they bring for criminal activities and threats, and express
concern over the increasing level and complexity of criminal misuse of ICTs. We
welcome the ongoing efforts in the Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a comprehensive
international convention on countering the use of ICTs for criminal purposes and
reaffirm our commitment to cooperating in the implementation of the mandate
adopted by the UN General Assembly resolution 75/282 in a timely manner.
24. We reaffirm our commitment to the promotion of an open, secure, stable,
accessible and peaceful ICT-environment, underscored the importance of enhancing
common understandings and intensifying cooperation in the use of ICTs and Internet.
We support the leading role of the United Nations in promoting constructive dialogue
on ensuring ICT-security, including within the UN Open-Ended Working Group on
security of and in the use of ICTs 2021-2025, and developing a universal legal
framework in this realm. We call for a comprehensive, balanced, objective approach
to the development and security of ICT products and systems. We underscore the
importance of establishing legal frameworks of cooperation among BRICS countries
on ensuring security in the use of ICTs. We also acknowledge the need to advance
practical intra-BRICS cooperation through implementation of the BRICS Roadmap of
Practical Cooperation on ensuring security in the use of ICTs and the activities of the
BRICS Working Group on security in the use of ICTs.
25. We reaffirm our commitment to strengthen international cooperation and our
collaboration against corruption and continue to implement the relevant international
agreements in this regard, in particular the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. With the knowledge that the scourge of corruption knows no geographic
boundaries, and respects no society or humanitarian cause, we have jointly put in place
a strong foundation to combat corruption through capacity building, including,
conducting training programmes and sharing of current best practices applied in each
of our countries. We will continue to reinforce these efforts and increase our
knowledge of the emerging avenues. We will enhance international cooperation
through collaborative information-sharing networks, and mutual legal assistance to
combat illicit financial flows, counter safe havens and support the investigation,
prosecution and recovery of stolen assets subject to domestic laws and regulations of
BRICS countries.
8

--- Page 9 ---
Partnership for Mutually Accelerated Growth
26. We note that an unbalanced recovery from the shock and hardship of the
pandemic is aggravating inequality across the world. The global growth momentum
has weakened, and the economic prospects have declined owing to trade
fragmentation, prolonged high inflation, tighter global financial conditions, in
particular the increase in interest rates in advanced economies, geopolitical tensions
and increased debt vulnerabilities.
27. We encourage multilateral financial institutions and international organizations
to play a constructive role in building global consensus on economic policies and
preventing systemic risks of economic disruption and financial fragmentation. We call
for Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) to continue implementing the
recommendations which should be voluntary within MDBs governance frameworks,
from the G20 Independent Review Report on MDBs Capital Adequacy Frameworks to
increase their lending capacities, while safeguarding MDBs long-term financial
stability, robust creditor rating, and preferred creditor status.
28. We believe that multilateral cooperation is essential to limit the risks stemming
from geopolitical and geoeconomic fragmentation and intensify efforts on areas of
mutual interest, including but not limited to, trade, poverty and hunger reduction,
sustainable development, including access to energy, water and food, fuel, fertilizers,
as well as mitigating and adapting to the impact of climate change, education, health
as well as pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
29. We note that high debt levels in some countries reduce the fiscal space needed
to address ongoing development challenges aggravated by spillover effects from
external shocks, particularly from sharp monetary tightening in advanced economies.
Rising interest rates and tighter financing conditions worsen debt vulnerabilities in
many countries. We believe it is necessary to address the international debt agenda
properly to support economic recovery and sustainable development, while taking
into account each nation’s laws and internal procedures. One of the instruments,
amongst others, to collectively address debt vulnerabilities is through the predictable,
orderly, timely and coordinated implementation of the G20 Common Framework for
Debt Treatment, with the participation of official bilateral creditors, private creditors
and Multilateral Development Banks in line with the principle of joint action and fair
9

--- Page 10 ---
burden-sharing.
30. We reaffirm the importance of the G20 to continue playing the role of the premier
multilateral forum in the field of international economic and financial cooperation that
comprises both developed and emerging markets and developing countries where
major economies jointly seek solutions to global challenges. We look forward to the
successful hosting of the 18th G20 Summit in New Delhi under the Indian G20
Presidency. We note the opportunities to build sustained momentum for change by
India, Brazil and South Africa presiding over the G20 from 2023 to 2025 and expressed
support for continuity and collaboration in their G20 presidencies and wish them all
success in their endeavours. Therefore, we are committed to a balanced approach by
continuing to amplify and further integrate the voice of the global South in the G20
agenda as under the Indian Presidency in 2023 and the Brazilian and South African
presidencies in 2024 and 2025.
31. We recognize the important role of BRICS countries working together to deal
with risks and challenges to the world economy in achieving global recovery and
sustainable development. We reaffirm our commitment to enhance macro-economic
policy coordination, deepen economic cooperation, and work to realize strong,
sustainable, balanced and inclusive economic recovery. We emphasize the importance
of continued implementation of the Strategy for BRICS Economic Partnership 2025 in
all relevant ministerial tracks and working groups. We will look to identify solutions for
accelerating the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
32. Recognising that BRICS countries produce one third of the world's food, we
reaffirm our commitment to strengthen agricultural cooperation and promote
sustainable agriculture and rural development of BRICS countries for enhancing food
security both within BRICS and worldwide. We emphasize the strategic importance of
facilitating steady access to agricultural inputs, on ensuring global food security. We
reiterate the importance of implementing the Action Plan 2021-2024 for Agricultural
Cooperation of BRICS Countries, and welcome the Strategy on Food Security
Cooperation of the BRICS Countries. We underscore the need for resilient food supply
chains.
33. We recognize the dynamism of the digital economy in enabling global economic
growth. We also recognize the positive role that trade and investment can play in
10

--- Page 11 ---
promoting sustainable development, national and regional industrialization, the
transition towards sustainable consumption and production patterns. We recognize
the challenges facing trade and investment development in the digital era and
acknowledge that BRICS members are at different levels of digital development, and
thus recognize the need to address respective challenges including the various digital
divides. We welcome the establishment of the BRICS Digital Economy Working Group.
We reaffirm that openness, efficiency, stability, reliability, are crucial in tackling
economic recovery challenges and boosting international trade and investment. We
encourage further cooperation among BRICS countries to enhance the
interconnectivity of supply chains and payment systems to promote trade and
investment flows. We agree to strengthen exchanges and cooperation in trade in
services as established in the BRICS Framework for Cooperation on Trade in Services,
with the BRICS Business Council and BRICS Women’s Business Alliance (WBA) with the
aim to promote implementation of BRICS Trade in Services Cooperation Roadmap and
relevant documents including the BRICS Framework for cooperation in Trade in
Professional Services.
34. We reiterate our support to the African Union Agenda 2063 and to Africa's efforts
towards integration, including through the operationalisation of the African
Continental Free Trade Area. We underscore that the AfCFTA is poised to create a
predictable environment for investments, particularly in infrastructure development,
and provides an opportunity to find synergies with partners on cooperation, trade and
development on the African continent. We underline the importance of strengthening
the partnership between BRICS and Africa to unlock mutually beneficial opportunities
for increased trade, investment and infrastructure development. We welcome progress
made towards the AfCFTA Protocol on Women and Youth in Trade and recognise its
potential to be a catalyst for economic and financial inclusion of women and youth
into Africa’s economy. We stress the importance of issues including industrialization,
infrastructure development, food security, agriculture modernisation for sustainable
growth health-care, and tackling climate change for the sustainable development of
Africa.
35. We further note that the African continent remains on the margins of the global
trading system and has much to gain through BRICS collaboration. The African
Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA) and BRICS cooperation presents
opportunities for the continent to transition away from its historic role as a commodity
11

--- Page 12 ---
exporter towards higher productivity value addition. We welcome and support the
inclusion of the African Union as a member of the G20 at the New Delhi G20 Summit.
36. We commit to strengthening intra-BRICS cooperation to intensify the BRICS
Partnership on New Industrial Revolution (PartNIR) and create new opportunities for
accelerating industrial development. We support intra-BRICS cooperation in human
resource development on new technologies through the BRICS Centre for Industrial
Competences (BCIC), BRICS PartNIR Innovation Centre, BRICS Startup Forum and
collaboration with other relevant BRICS mechanisms, to carry out training programmes
to address challenges of NIR for Inclusive and sustainable industrialization. We
reiterate our commitment to continue discussion on the establishment of BCIC in
cooperation with UNIDO to jointly support the development of Industry 4.0 skills
development among the BRICS countries and to promote partnerships and increased
productivity in the New Industrial Revolution. We look forward to the cooperation with
UNIDO and request the PartNIR Advisory Group to coordinate with UNIDO.
37. We recognize the crucial role that Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(MSMEs) play in unlocking the full potential of BRICS economies and reaffirm the
importance of their participation in production networks and value chains. We will
continue joint efforts aimed at eliminating constraints such as lack of easily accessible
information and financing, skills shortage, network effects, as well as regulation of
excessive administrative burden, and procurement related constraints ensuring easily
accessible information and financing, skill up gradation and market linkage. We
endorse the BRICS MSMEs Cooperation Framework which promotes BRICS
cooperation on such issues as exchanging information about fairs and exhibitions, and
encouraging participation of MSMEs in the selected events to enhance interactions
and cooperation amongst MSMEs which may secure deals. Member states will
facilitate exchange of business missions, and promote sector specific Business to
Business (B2B) meetings amongst the MSMEs, to enhance enterprise-to-enterprise
cooperation and business alliances between the MSMEs of BRICS, with a particular
focus on women-owned and youth-owned MSMEs. Member States will provide
information relating to MSMEs, business development opportunities and possibilities
of partnerships for the development of MSMEs in the BRICS countries. In addition, we
will promote sharing of information on trade policies, and market intelligence for
MSMEs to increase their participation in international trade. We will facilitate access to
resources and capabilities such as skills, knowledge networks, and technology that
12

--- Page 13 ---
could help MSMEs improve their participation in the economy and global value chains.
We will exchange views on measures and approaches for integrating BRICS MSMEs
into global trade and Global Value Chains, including by sharing experience on how
regional integration approaches can support the development of MSMEs.
38. We reiterate the commitment to promote employment for sustainable
development, including to develop skills to ensure resilient recovery, gender-
responsive employment and social protection policies including workers' rights. We
reaffirm our commitment to respect, promote, and realise decent work for all and
achieve social justice. We will step up efforts to effectively abolish child labour based
on the Durban Call to Action and accelerate progress towards universal social
protection for all by 2030. We will invest in skills development systems to improve
access to relevant and quality skills for workers in the informal economy and workers
in new forms of employment as we seek to increase productivity for economically,
socially, and environmentally sustainable and inclusive economies. We will explore the
development of a BRICS platform to implement the Productivity Ecosystem for Decent
Work.
39. We acknowledge the urgent need for tourism industry recovery and the
importance of increasing mutual tourist flows and will work towards further
strengthening the BRICS Alliance for Green Tourism to promote measures, which can
shape a more resilient, sustainable and inclusive tourism sector.
40. We agree to enhance exchanges and cooperation in the field of standardization
and make full use of standards to advance sustainable development.
41. We agree to continue to deepen cooperation on competition amongst BRICS
countries and create a fair competition market environment for international
economic and trade cooperation.
42. We agree to enhance dialogue and cooperation on intellectual property rights
through, the BRICS IPR cooperation mechanism (IPRCM). As we celebrate a decade of
cooperation of the Heads of Intellectual Property Offices, we welcome the alignment
of their workplan to the Sustainable Development Goals.
43. We support enhancing statistical cooperation within BRICS as data, statistics and
information form the basis of informed and effective decision making. On the 10th
13

--- Page 14 ---
anniversary of its first issue, we support the continued release of the BRICS Joint
Statistical Publication 2023 and the BRICS Joint Statistical Publication Snapshot 2023
for engaging a wider range of users.
44. We recognise the widespread benefits of fast, inexpensive, transparent, safe, and
inclusive payment systems. We look forward to the report by the BRICS Payment Task
Force (BPTF) on the mapping of the various elements of the G20 Roadmap on Cross-
border Payments in BRICS countries. We welcome the sharing of experience by BRICS
members on payment infrastructures, including the interlinking of cross-border
payment systems. We believe this will further enhance cooperation amongst the BRICS
countries and encourage further dialogue on payment instruments to facilitate trade
and investment flows between the BRICS members as well as other developing
countries. We stress the importance of encouraging the use of local currencies in
international trade and financial transactions between BRICS as well as their trading
partners. We also encourage strengthening of correspondent banking networks
between the BRICS countries and enabling settlements in the local currencies.
45. We task our Finance Ministers and/or Central Bank Governors, as appropriate, to
consider the issue of local currencies, payment instruments and platforms and report
back to us by the next Summit.
46. We recognise the key role of the NDB in promoting infrastructure and sustainable
development of its member countries. We congratulate Ms Dilma Rousseff, former
President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, as President of the New Development
Bank (NDB) and are confident that she will contribute to strengthening of the NDB in
effectively achieving its mandate. We expect the NDB to provide and maintain the
most effective financing solutions for sustainable development, a steady process in
membership expansion, and improvements in corporate governance and operational
effectiveness towards the fulfilment of NDB's General Strategy for 2022-2026. We
welcome the three new members of the NDB, namely Bangladesh, Egypt and United
Arab Emirates. We encourage the NDB to play an active role in knowledge sharing
process and incorporate the member-countries best practices in its operational
policies, according to its governance mechanism and taking into account national
priorities and development goals. We see the NDB as an important member of global
MDB family, given its unique status as an institution created by EMDCs for EMDCs.
14

--- Page 15 ---
47. We welcome the establishment of the BRICS Think Tank Network for Finance
during 2022 and efforts to operationalise the Network. We will work towards the
identification and designation of the lead Think Tanks from member countries. We
endorse the Operational Guidelines for the BRICS Think Tank Network for Finance
developed under South Africa’s Chairship, which provides guidance on how the
Network will operate in terms of governance, delivery of outputs and funding of the
BRICS Think Tank Network for Finance.
48. We recognise that infrastructure investments support human, social,
environmental, and economic development. We note that the demand for
infrastructure is growing, with a greater need for scale, innovation and sustainability.
We highlight that BRICS countries continue to offer excellent opportunities for
infrastructure investment. In this regard, we further recognise that leveraging
governments’ limited resources to catalyse private capital, expertise and efficiency will
be paramount in closing the infrastructure investment gap in BRICS countries.
49. We continue to support the work of the Task Force on Public-Private Partnership
(PPP) and Infrastructure in sharing knowledge, good practices and lessons learnt on
the effective development and delivery of infrastructure for the benefit of all member
countries. In this regard, the Task Force has collated guiding principles that advance
the adoption of a programmatic approach in infrastructure delivery and promotes the
use of PPPs and other blended finance solutions in infrastructure development and
delivery. We look forward to convening the Infrastructure Investment Symposium later
this year for a discussion amongst BRICS governments, investors and financiers on
ways to work with the private sector to promote the use of green, transition and
sustainable finance in infrastructure delivery.
50. The BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA) continues to be an important
mechanism for mitigating the effects of a crisis situation, complementing existing
international financial and monetary arrangements, and contributing to the
strengthening of the global financial safety net. We reiterate our commitment to the
continued strengthening of the CRA and look forward to the successful completion of
the sixth Test-Run later in 2023. We also support progress made to amend the
outstanding technical issues on the Inter-Central Bank Agreement and endorse the
proposed theme of 2023 BRICS Economic Bulletin ‘Challenges in a post-COVID-19
environment.
15

--- Page 16 ---
51. We welcome the continued cooperation on topics of mutual interest on
sustainable and transition finance, information security, financial technology, and
payments, and look forward to building on work in these areas under the relevant
work streams, including the proposed study on leveraging technology to address
climate data gaps in the financial sector and support the proposed initiatives aimed at
enhancing cyber security and developing financial technology, including the sharing
of knowledge and experience in this area.
Partnership for Sustainable Development
52. We reaffirm the call for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in its three dimensions: economic, social and environmental, in a
balanced and integrated manner by mobilising the means required to implement the
2030 Agenda. We urge donor countries to honour their Official Development
Assistance (ODA) commitments and to facilitate capacity building and the transfer of
technology along with additional development resources to developing countries, in
line with the national policy objectives of recipients. We highlight in this regard that
the SDGs Summit to be held in New York in September 2023 and the Summit of the
Future to be held in September 2024, constitute significant opportunities for renewing
international commitment on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
53. We recognise the importance of implementing the SDGs in an integrated and
holistic manner, inter alia through poverty eradication as well as combating climate
change whilst promoting sustainable land use and water management, conservation
of biological diversity, and the sustainable use of its components and the biodiversity
and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilisation of
genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources, in line with
Article 1 of Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and in accordance with national
circumstances, priorities and capabilities. We also underscore the significance of
technology and innovation, international cooperation, public-private partnerships,
including South-South cooperation.
54. We underscore the importance of collaborating on biodiversity conservation and
sustainable use matters, such as research and development of conservation
technologies, development of protected areas, and the combatting of illegal trade in
wildlife. Furthermore, we will continue to actively participate in international
16

--- Page 17 ---
biodiversity-related conventions, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD),
its protocols and advancing the implementation of its Kunming-Montreal Global
Biodiversity Framework (GBF), Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD) and working towards the Global Initiative on Reducing Land
Degradation and Enhancing Conservation of Terrestrial Habitats.
55. We welcome the historic adoption of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework (KMGBF) at the 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD COP-15) in December 2022. We thus undertake to strive
towards the implementation of all the global goals and targets of the KMGBF, in
accordance with the principles of common but differentiated responsibilities and
national circumstances, priorities and capabilities in order to achieve its mission to halt
and reverse biodiversity loss and vision of living in harmony with nature. We urge
developed countries to provide adequate means of implementation, including
financial resources, capacity-building, technical and scientific cooperation, and access
to and transfer of technology to fully implement the KMGBF. We also acknowledge
the potential for cooperation on the sustainable use of biodiversity in business to
support local economic development, industrialisation, job creation, and sustainable
business opportunities.
56. We reemphasise the importance of implementing the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Paris Agreement and the principle
of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective Capabilities (CBDR-RC)
enhancing low-cost climate technology transfer, capacity building as well as
mobilizing affordable, adequate and timely delivered new additional financial
resources for environmentally sustainable projects. We agree that there is a need to
defend, promote and strengthen the multilateral response to Climate Change and to
work together for a successful outcome of the 28th Conference of the Parties of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC COP28). We
recognise that the Means of Implementation should be enhanced by developed
countries, including through adequate and timely flow of affordable Climate Finance,
Technical Cooperation, Capacity Building and transfer of Technology for climate
actions. Furthermore, there is a need for comprehensive financial arrangements to
address loss and damage due to climate change, including operationalising Fund on
Loss and Damage as agreed at the UNFCCC COP27 to benefit developing countries.
17

--- Page 18 ---
57. We agree to address the challenges posed by climate change while also ensuring
a just, affordable and sustainable transition to a low carbon and low-emission
economy in line with the principles of CBDR-RC, in light of different national
circumstances. We advocate for just equitable and sustainable transitions, based on
nationally defined development priorities, and we call on developed countries to lead
by example and support developing countries towards such transitions.
58. We stress the need for support of developed countries to developing countries
for access to existing and emerging low-emission technologies and solutions that
avoid, abate and remove GHG emissions and enhance adaptation action to address
climate change. We further emphasize the need for enhancing low-cost technology
transfer and for mobilizing affordable, adequate new and timely delivered additional
financial resources for environmentally sustainable projects.
59. We express our strong determination to contribute to a successful COP28 in
Dubai, later this year, with the focus on implementation and cooperation. As the main
mechanism for assessing collective progress towards achieving the purpose of the
Paris Agreement and its long-term goals and promoting climate action on all aspects
of the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC, the Global Stocktake must be effective and
identifying implementation gaps on the global response to climate change, whilst
prospectively laying the foundations for enhanced ambition by all, in particular by
developed countries. We call upon developed countries to fill outstanding gaps in
means of implementation for mitigation and adaptation actions in developing
countries.
60. We welcome Brazil’s candidacy to host COP30 as the year 2025 will be key to the
very future of the global response to climate change.
61. We further urge developed countries to honour their commitments, including of
mobilizing the USD 100bn per annum by 2020 and through 2025 to support climate
action in developing countries. In addition, importance of doubling adaptation finance
by 2025 from the base of 2019 is also key in order to implement adaptation actions.
Moreover, we look forward to setting up an ambitious New Collective Quantified goal,
prior to 2025, as per the needs and priorities of developing countries. This will require
enhanced financial support from developed countries that is additional, grant-based
and/or concessional, timely delivered, and adequate to take forward adaptation and
18

--- Page 19 ---
mitigation action in a balanced manner. This extends to support for the
implementation of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
62. We acknowledge that the financial mechanisms and investments to support the
implementation of environment and climate change programmes need to be
enhanced, and increased momentum to reform these financial mechanisms, as well as
the multilateral development banks and international financial institutions is required.
In this regard, we call on the shareholders of these institutions to take decisive action
to scale-up climate finance and investments in support towards achieving the SDGs
related to climate change and make their institutional arrangements fit for purpose.
63. We oppose trade barriers including those under the pretext of tackling climate
change imposed by certain developed countries and reiterate our commitment to
enhancing coordination on these issues. We underline that measures taken to tackle
climate change and biodiversity loss must be WTO-consistent and must not constitute
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on
international trade and should not create unnecessary obstacles to international trade.
Any such measure must be guided by the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities (CBDR-RC), in the light of different national
circumstances. We express our concern at any WTO inconsistent discriminatory
measure that will distort international trade, risk new trade barriers and shift burden
of addressing climate change and biodiversity loss to BRICS members and developing
countries.
64. We commit to intensify our efforts towards improving our collective capacity for
global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response, and strengthening our
ability to fight back any such pandemics in the future collectively. In this regard, we
consider it important to continue our support to the BRICS Virtual Vaccine Research
and Development Center. We look forward to the holding of the High-Level Meeting
on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response to be to be held on 20th
September 2023 at the United Nations General Assembly and we call for an outcome
that will mobilise political will and continued leadership on this matter.
65. We recognize the fundamental role of primary health care as a key foundation
for Universal Health Care and health system’s resilience, as well as on prevention and
response to health emergencies. We believe that the High-level meeting on Universal
19

--- Page 20 ---
Health Coverage (UHC) to be held at the UN General Assembly in September 2023
would be a critical step for mobilizing the highest political support for UHC as the
cornerstone to achieving SDG 3 (good health and well-being). We reiterate our
support for the international initiatives, with the leadership of WHO, on addressing
tuberculosis (TB) and look forward to actively engaging in the United Nations High-
Level Meeting on TB in New York in September this year and encourage an assertive
political declaration.
66. Taking into account national legislation and priorities of BRICS countries, we
commit to continue cooperation in traditional medicine in line with previous meetings
of the BRICS Health Ministers and their outcomes, as well as the BRICS High-Level
Forum on the Traditional Medicine.
67. We note that BRICS countries have significant experience and potential in the
field of nuclear medicine and radio pharmaceutics. We welcome the decision to
establish a BRICS Working Group on Nuclear Medicine to expand cooperation in this
area.
68. We welcome South Africa hosting BRICS Science Technology and Innovation (STI)
Steering Committee meetings throughout 2023 as the main coordination mechanism
to manage and ensure the successful hosting of BRICS STI activities. We call on the
Steering Committee to undertake a strategic review of the thematic focus areas and
organisational framework of the BRICS STI Working Group to ensure better alignment
as appropriate with current BRICS policy priorities. We commend South Africa for
hosting the 8th BRICS Young Scientist Forum and the concurrent organization of the
6th BRICS Young Innovator Prize. We commend the success of the BRICS STI
Framework Programme in continuing to connect scientists through the funding of an
impressive portfolio of research projects between BRICS countries. We also appreciate
the efforts of the BRICS STI Framework Programme Secretariat in facilitating a
discussion to launch in 2024 a Call for Proposals for BRICS STI Flagship Projects. We
recognize the progress achieved in the implementation of the BRICS Action Plan for
Innovation Cooperation (2021-24). In this regard we encourage further actions to be
taken on initiatives such as the BRICS Techtransfer (the BRICS Centers for Technology
Transfer) and the iBRICS Network (the dedicated BRICS innovation network). We also
welcome more actions to be taken, especially by the BRICS STIEP (Science, Technology
and Innovation Entrepreneurship Partnership) Working Group, in the fields of
20

