--- Page 1 ---
OFFICIAL
Chair’s Statement of the Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs/International
Relations of BRICS Member Countries*
1. The BRICS Ministers of Foreign Affairs/International Relations met on 28 and 29 April 2025 in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. They exchanged views on major global and regional trends and issues. They reaffirmed
their commitment to strengthening the framework of BRICS Strategic Partnership under the three pillars
of cooperation – policy and security, economy and finance, and cultural and people-to-people exchanges.
They reaffirmed their commitment to the BRICS spirit featuring mutual respect and understanding,
equality, solidarity, openness, inclusiveness, and consensus.
2. The Ministers welcomed the Republic of Indonesia as a BRICS member, as well as the Republic of
Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Cuba, the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, Malaysia, the Kingdom of Thailand, the Republic of Uganda, and the Republic of
Uzbekistan as BRICS partner countries as of 1 January 2025.
3. The Ministers reiterated their strong commitment to multilateralism and to international law, including
the Purposes and Principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in their entirety and
interconnectedness, as its indispensable cornerstone, as well as the central role of the UN in an
international system in which sovereign states cooperate to maintain international peace and security,
advance sustainable development and ensure the promotion and protection of human rights for all. In this
regard, the Ministers condemned attempts, including by deliberately withholding assessed contributions,
to unilaterally undermine the work of global multilateral institutions and impair the implementation of
their respective mandates.
4 Recalling that 2025 marks the eightieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, a war which
brought untold sorrow to humankind, particularly in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Pacific and other parts of
the world, the Ministers rendered their full support to the UNGA Resolution 79/272 on the Eightieth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War, on this historic event, which established the conditions
for the creation of the United Nations, designed to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
5. The Ministers noted the current global context of polarization and distrust and encouraged global action
to strengthen international peace and security. They called for the international community to respond to
these challenges and associated security threats through politico-diplomatic measures to lower conflict
potential and stressed the need to engage in conflict prevention efforts, including through addressing their
root causes. They underscored that security among all countries is indivisible and reiterated their
commitment to the peaceful resolution of international disputes through dialogue, consultation and
diplomacy. They encouraged the active role of regional organizations in conflict prevention and resolution
and supported all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of crises. They highlighted the importance
* Egypt and Ethiopia objected to parts of paragraph 8 of this document.
OFFICIAL

--- Page 2 ---
OFFICIAL
of mediation and preventive diplomacy as essential tools to avoid crises and prevent their escalation, in
accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the UN Charter.
6. The Ministers noted that multipolarity provides more opportunities for EMDCs to unlock their
constructive potential and enjoy universally beneficial, inclusive and equitable economic globalization
and cooperation. They agreed that, in the context of global changes, it is crucial that developing countries
work together as closely as possible to promote dialogue and mutually beneficial relations among nations.
The Ministers highlighted the importance of the Global South as a driver for a more equitable, just,
democratic and balanced multipolar world order, especially in the face of significant global challenges,
such as deepening geopolitical tensions, strategic competition among nations, economic downturns,
protectionist measures, technological changes, and migratory crises. They further cautioned that
escalating antagonisms will not lead to peace or development and recalled the urgent need to focus on
peaceful coexistence, tolerance, cooperation and dialogue, in contrast to narratives that only deepen
fragmentation and geopolitical polarization. They underscored the pivotal role BRICS countries can play
in giving the Global South a platform for voicing their concerns and interests, as well as actively
participating in the promotion of a more just, sustainable, inclusive and multipolar international order.
7. The Ministers reiterated their commitment to reforming global governance by promoting a more just,
equitable, agile, effective, efficient, responsive, representative, legitimate, democratic and accountable
international and multilateral system in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared
benefits. They also reiterated their commitment to ensuring greater and more meaningful participation and
representation of developing and least developed countries, especially African countries, in global
decision-making processes and structures, and making them better attuned to contemporary realities. They
further reiterated the urgent need to achieve equitable geographical representation in the Secretariat of the
United Nations and other international organizations in a timely manner. The Ministers stressed the need
for the selection and appointment process of UN executive heads and senior positions to be guided by the
principles of transparency and inclusiveness, and carried out in accordance with all the provisions of
Article 101 of the UN Charter, with due regard for recruiting staff on a geographical basis as wide as
possible and the increased participation of women, and adhere to the general rule that there should be no
monopoly on senior posts in the UN system by nationals of any State or group of States.
8. Recognizing the 2023 Johannesburg II Declaration, the Ministers supported a comprehensive reform
of the United Nations, including its Security Council, with a view to making it more democratic,
representative, effective and efficient, and to increase the representation of developing countries in the
Council’s memberships so that it can adequately respond to prevailing global challenges and supported
the legitimate aspirations of emerging and developing countries from Africa, Asia and Latin America,
including Brazil and India, to play a greater role in international affairs, in particular in the United Nations,
including its Security Council. They also recognised the legitimate aspirations of African countries,
reflected in the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration.
9. In light of the 80th Anniversary of the United Nations, the Ministers recalled the UNGA Resolutions
75/1, 77/335 and other relevant resolutions, and reiterated the urgent call for reforms of the principal
organs of the United Nations with a view to achieving concrete progress. They recommitted to instill new
life in the discussions on reform of the UN Security Council and continue the work to revitalize the
General Assembly and strengthen the Economic and Social Council. They looked forward to the
successful conclusion of the 2025 Review of the Peacebuilding architecture and agreed to reinforce their
coordination in the Peacebuilding Commission.
10. The Ministers expressed their concern about ongoing conflicts in many parts of the world and the
current state of polarization and fragmentation in the international order. They expressed alarm at the
current trend that has seen a critical increase in global military spending, to the detriment of the adequate
financing for development. The Ministers advocated for a multilateral approach that respects diverse
national viewpoints and positions on crucial global issues, including sustainable development, the
eradication of hunger and poverty and adequately addressing the challenges posed by climate change.
OFFICIAL

--- Page 3 ---
OFFICIAL
11. Ministers expressed serious concern at the prospect of a fragmented global economy and the
weakening of multilateralism and their support for the open, transparent, fair, predictable, inclusive,
equitable, non-discriminatory and rules-based multilateral trading system with the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) at its core. Stressing that international trade is an important driver of inclusive growth,
poverty and hunger eradication, the promotion of sustainable development in its three dimensions and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the Global South.
12. The Ministers voiced serious concerns about the rise of unjustified unilateral protectionist measures
inconsistent with WTO rules, including indiscriminate raising of reciprocal tariffs and non-tariff measures,
such as the abuse of green policies for protectionist purposes. They warned that such measures disrupt
global supply chain and bring more uncertainty to the global economy. In this regard, they called upon all
sides to take measures to defend free trade and multilateral trading system, with a view to addressing
current trade challenges and fostering a favorable trade and investment environment for all, especially for
EMDCs and developing countries. In the year of the 30th anniversary of the World Trade Organization
(WTO), they recognized that it is the only multilateral institution with the necessary mandate to set the
rules for the multilateral trading system and lead on the multiple trade dimensions, including the
development dimension, of international trade discussions. They reaffirmed their commitment to continue
to promote the necessary reform of the WTO to improve all its functions while strengthening its
foundational principles. They underscored the need to strengthen the WTO in light of emerging arbitrary
unilateral and protectionist measures. They regretted that the 2024 deadline for the full restoration of the
two-tier dispute settlement system expired without a result and remained committed to having a fully and
well-functioning dispute settlement system accessible to all Members as a matter of urgency. They
reiterated their commitment to enhancing dialogue on multilateral trading system and WTO-related issues
through the BRICS Informal Consultative Framework on WTO and agreed to participate actively in the
preparation for the WTO 14th Ministerial Conference (MC14), to be held in 2026, and to contribute to the
achievement of concrete outcomes. They took note of and strongly supported Ethiopia’s bid for accession
to the WTO.
13. The Ministers reiterated that the unilateral coercive measures, inter-alia in the form of unilateral
economic sanctions and secondary sanctions that are contrary to international law, have far-reaching
implications for the human rights, including the right to development, of the general population of targeted
states, disproportionally affecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations. Therefore, they called for
their elimination.
14. The Ministers reaffirmed the need for efforts aimed at de-escalating tensions and finding a path to
peace as well as for full respect for and compliance with international humanitarian law by all parties to
armed conflicts, particularly the obligation to protect civilians and humanitarian personnel. They strongly
condemned all violations of international humanitarian law and the denial or obstruction of humanitarian
access. They recalled that humanitarian assistance must be provided in accordance with the guiding
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, as established in UN General Assembly
resolution 46/182.
15. In the context of the 30th anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Ministers
reiterated their commitment to promote the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. They also reaffirmed their commitment to full implementation and advancement
of the Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda, especially in view of the upcoming 25th anniversary
of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000). They further reiterated the importance of ensuring the
full, equal, safe and meaningful participation of women in decision-making at all levels of peace and
security processes, including conflict prevention and resolution, humanitarian relief, mediation, peace
operations, peacebuilding, and post-conflict reconstruction and development.
16. The Ministers recalled their national positions concerning the conflict in Ukraine as expressed in the
appropriate fora, including the UN Security Council and UN General Assembly. They noted with
appreciation relevant proposals of mediation and good offices, including the African Peace Initiative and
the creation of the Group of Friends for Peace, aimed at peaceful resolution of the conflict through
OFFICIAL

--- Page 4 ---
OFFICIAL
dialogue and diplomacy. They expressed their expectation that current efforts will lead to a sustainable
peace settlement.
17. The Ministers expressed serious concern over continued conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA) region and welcomed the Joint Statement by BRICS Deputy Foreign Ministers and Special
Envoys at their meeting of March 28, 2025.
18. The Ministers expressed grave concern with the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, with
the resumption of Israeli attacks against Gaza and the obstruction of the entry of humanitarian aid into the
territory. They deplored the collapse of the ceasefire announced on January 15th and urged the parties to
fully comply with its terms. They exhorted the parties to engage in good faith in further negotiations to
achieve the permanent cessation of hostilities, the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip,
and the release of all hostages and detainees held in violation of international law, as well as to facilitate
and enable unhindered access of humanitarian aid.
19. The Ministers called on the international community to support the Palestinian authority in undergoing
reforms to fulfill the Palestinians’ legitimate aspirations for independence and statehood, as well as the
expeditious reconstruction of the civil infrastructure of the territory, with a central role by the Palestinians,
as agreed in the Emergency Arab Summit on Palestine, on 4 March 2025, and they noted with appreciation
the initiative to convene an upcoming pledging conference to be held in Cairo.
20. The Ministers expressed their firm opposition to the forced displacement, temporary or permanent,
under any pretexts, of any of the Palestinian population from the Occupied Palestinian Territory. They
condemned provocative statements regarding plans for the imposition of Israeli sovereignty over the
occupied West Bank and the intensification of settlement activity in the territory. They reiterated that these
settlements are illegal under international law and that any settlement activity must be stopped and
reversed.
21. The Ministers reasserted their steadfast support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and stressed the need to fully respect the mandate,
bestowed on it by the UNGA, for the provision of basic services to Palestine refugees in its five fields of
operations. They noted, in this regard, the provisional measures of the International Court of Justice in the
legal proceedings instituted by South Africa against Israel, which, inter alia, reaffirmed Israel’s obligation
to ensure the provision of humanitarian aid in Gaza.
22. The Ministers reaffirmed that a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can only be
achieved by peaceful means and depends on the fulfillment of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination and return. They reiterated their unwavering commitment
to the two-state solution, in accordance with international law, including relevant UN Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, and the Arab Peace Initiative, with an independent and viable State of
Palestine living side by side with Israel, in peace and security, within the 1967 borders, which includes
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, with East Jerusalem as its capital. They looked forward to the High-
Level International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the
Implementation of the Two-State Solution, to be held in June 2025.
23. The Ministers welcomed the ceasefire in Lebanon and called on all parties to strictly adhere to its
terms and to fully implement UNSC Resolution 1701. They condemned the continued violations of the
ceasefire and of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon. They called on Israel
to respect the terms agreed with the Lebanese government and to withdraw its occupying forces from all
Lebanon territory including the five sites in Southern Lebanon in which they remain.
24. They reaffirmed their commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of
Syria and called for a peaceful and inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, UN-facilitated political
process, based on the principles of Security Council Resolution 2254 (2015), in a manner that ensures the
security and well-being of the civilian population without discrimination. They condemned the
widespread violence perpetrated in Syria’s Latakia and Tartus provinces since 6 March, including mass
OFFICIAL

--- Page 5 ---
OFFICIAL
killings of civilians among the Alawite community, the continuation of terrorist activities by ISIL and Al-
Qaeda affiliates in Syria, the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters’ presence in Syrian territory as well
as the risk of spreading terrorists from Syria to regional countries. Syria should firmly oppose all forms
of terrorism and extremism.
25. The Ministers reiterated that the principle “African solutions to African problems” should continue to
serve as the basis for conflict resolution on the African continent. They recognised the critical role of the
African Union in the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa and reaffirmed their
support for African peace efforts on the continent, including those undertaken by the African Union, and
African sub-regional organizations.
26. The Ministers commended the efforts and achievements by African countries in their pursuit of lasting
peace and sustainable development, while expressing serious concern over the severe humanitarian crises
resulting from new and protracted armed conflicts in some regions of Africa, particularly the devastating
effects of conflicts in Sudan, the Great Lakes region, and the Horn of Africa, which have led to serious
humanitarian crises. In this regard, they reaffirmed their support for efforts aimed at finding political
solutions to these crises, reiterated the call for an end to hostilities, and emphasized the need for the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.
27. They expressed grave concern over the escalating violence and humanitarian crisis in Sudan and
regional spillover of the conflicts, as well as increased risk of spread of extremism and terrorism and
reiterated their call for an immediate, permanent, and unconditional ceasefire and peaceful resolution of
the conflict with engagement in peace talks as the only way to end this conflict, sustained, urgent and
unimpeded access of the Sudanese population to humanitarian assistance, and the scaling up of
humanitarian assistance to Sudan and neighboring states. They welcomed the convening of the High-level
Humanitarian Conference for the People of Sudan on 14 February 2025 co-hosted by AU, Ethiopia, IGAD,
and UAE, in coordination with the UN.
28. The Ministers expressed serious concern with the ongoing deterioration of the security, humanitarian,
political and economic situation in Haiti. They stressed that the current crisis requires a Haitian-led
solution that encompasses national dialogue and consensus building among local political forces,
institutions and the society and called on the international community to support the Haitian endeavors to
dismantle the gangs, enhance the security situation and put in place the foundations for long-lasting social
and economic development in the country.
29. The Ministers expressed strong condemnation of any acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, whenever, wherever and by whomsoever committed. They condemned in
the strongest terms the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir on 22 April 2025, during which at least 26
people were killed and many more injured. They reaffirmed their commitment to combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, including the cross-border movement of terrorists, terrorism financing
and safe havens. They reiterated that terrorism should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group and that all those involved in terrorist activities and their support must be held
accountable and brought to justice in accordance with relevant national and international law. The
Ministers urged to ensure zero tolerance for terrorism and rejected double standards in countering
terrorism. They emphasized the primary responsibility of States in combating terrorism and that global
efforts to prevent and counter terrorist threats must fully comply with their obligations under international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the purposes and principles thereof, and
relevant international conventions and protocols, in particular international human rights law,
international refugee law and international humanitarian law, as applicable. They welcomed the activities
of the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Working Group (CTWG) and its five Subgroups based upon the BRICS
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the BRICS Counter-Terrorism Action Plan and the CTWG position paper.
They also looked forward to further deepening counter-terrorism cooperation. The Ministers called for an
expeditious finalization and adoption of the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism in the
UN framework. The Ministers called for concerted actions against all UN designated terrorist and terrorist
entities.
OFFICIAL

--- Page 6 ---
OFFICIAL
30. The Ministers reiterated their commitment to preventing and combating illicit financial flows,
including money laundering and the financing of terrorism, as well as other forms of transnational
organized crime, such as drug trafficking, crimes that affect the environment, illicit trafficking of firearms,
trafficking in persons, use of ICTs for criminal purposes and corruption. They reaffirmed their
commitment to the principles of technical and non-politicized nature of international anti-criminal
cooperation, including for the purpose of prevention and of financial investigations. They noted the need
to further strengthen such cooperation including through relevant existing BRICS working groups based
on the documents adopted in BRICS as well as the relevant international legal instruments to which
BRICS countries are parties. They also emphasized the importance of creating conditions for the safe
development of the younger generation, reducing the risk of their involvement in illegal activities, and
welcomed the development of relevant international projects with the participation of young people.
31. The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to promote BRICS cooperation in the prevention of and
fight against corruption and to the continued implementation of relevant international agreements in this
regard, in particular the United Nations Convention against Corruption. They welcomed the work of the
BRICS Anti-Corruption Working Group to foster collaboration on anti-corruption matters, including the
formulation of the BRICS Common Vision and Joint Action on Enhanced Anti-Corruption Cooperation
and Recovery and Return of Assets and Proceeds of Corruption, promotion of denial of safe haven and
strengthening capacity-building among the member countries.
32. The Ministers expressed concerns about the growing risks of nuclear danger and conflict. They
reiterated the need for invigorating the system of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation and for
preserving its integrity and effectiveness to achieve global stability and international peace and security.
They stressed the significant contribution of nuclear-weapon-free zones to the strengthening of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, reaffirmed their support for and respect towards all existing nuclear-weapons-
free-zones and their associated assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and
acknowledged the paramount importance of the efforts aiming at accelerating the implementation of the
resolutions on the Establishment of a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons of Mass
Destruction in the Middle East, including the Conference convened pursuant to UN General Assembly
Decision 73/546. The Ministers called on all invited parties to participate in this conference in good faith
and engage with this effort constructively. They welcomed the adoption of the UNGA Resolution 79/241
“Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects”.
33. The Ministers recognized the need to ensure the use of space systems, as well as the achievements of
space science and technologies, for peaceful purposes. They also reasserted their support for ensuring the
long-term sustainability of outer space activities and prevention of an arms race in outer space (PAROS)
and of its weaponization, as well as the threats or use of force against outer space objects, including
through negotiations to adopt a relevant legal multilateral instrument to ensure global security. They
recognized the submission of the updated Draft Treaty on the Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in
Outer Space, the Threat or Use of Force against Outer Space Objects (PPWT) to the Conference on
Disarmament in 2014 as an important step towards this goal. They stressed that practical and non-binding
commitments such as Transparency and Confidence-Building Measures (TCBMs), and universally agreed
norms, rules, and principles may also contribute to PAROS. They noted the initiative of some BRICS
Members at the General Assembly to create a single Open-Ended Working Group to enable coherent,
inclusive and effective discussions that serves such purpose and undertake to engage constructively in the
process, on the basis of existing achievements, including on substantial elements on a legally binding
instrument on PAROS.
34. While emphasizing the potential of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) to bridge
the growing digital divides within and between countries, the Ministers acknowledged challenges and
threats stemming from and within the digital realm. They reaffirmed their commitment to the promotion
of an open, secure, stable, accessible, peaceful and interoperable ICT environment. They underscored the
leading role of the United Nations in fostering constructive dialogue to forge common understandings on
security in the use of ICTs. They commended the ongoing work of the UN Open Ended Working Group
OFFICIAL

--- Page 7 ---
OFFICIAL
on the Security of and in the Use of ICTs 2021-2025 as the sole global and inclusive mechanism on this
matter, and underlined their common purpose to a successful finalization of its work this July. They
reaffirmed their commitment to the establishment, by consensus, of a single-track, state-led permanent
mechanism on this issue under the auspices of the United Nations, reporting to the First Committee of the
UNGA. They called for a comprehensive, balanced, objective approach to the development and security
of ICT products and systems as well as for the development and implementation of globally interoperable
common rules and standards for supply chain security.
35. We commend the adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Convention against
Cybercrime, a landmark multilateral achievement which will constitute an effective tool and the necessary
legal framework for international cooperation in preventing and combating cybercrime and in ensuring
the timely and lawful collection and sharing of evidence in electronic form of any serious crimes that may
be committed through the use of ICT systems. We highlight the important contribution of BRICS countries
to its adoption since it was first proposed. We call upon all States to sign, at the earliest opportunity [in
Hanoi in 2025], and ratify it, in accordance with domestic laws, processes and procedures, as soon as
possible in order to ensure its rapid entry into force, as well as to continue their engagement in the ad Hoc
Committee, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 74/247 and 75/282, with a view to
negotiating a draft protocol supplementary to the Convention, addressing, inter alia, additional criminal
offences as appropriate.
36. The Ministers reiterated the need for all countries to cooperate in promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms under the principles of equality and mutual respect. They agreed to
continue to treat all human rights, including the right to development, in a fair and equal manner, on the
same footing and with the same emphasis. They agreed to strengthen cooperation on issues of common
interests both within BRICS and in multilateral fora, including the United Nations General Assembly and
Human Rights Council, taking into account the necessity to promote, protect and fulfil human rights in a
non-selective, non-politicised and constructive manner and without double standards. They called for the
respect of democracy and human rights and underlined that they should be implemented on the level of
global governance as well as at the regional and national level. They reaffirmed their commitment to
ensuring the promotion and protection of democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all with
the aim to build a brighter shared future for the international community, based on mutually beneficial
cooperation. They reaffirmed their commitment to the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as to promote racial equality.
37. The Ministers acknowledged the annual UNGA resolution on “Combating glorification of Nazism,
neo-Nazism, and other practices that contribute to fueling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
38. The Ministers expressed serious concern over exponential spread and proliferation of disinformation,
misinformation, including propagating false narratives and fake news, as well as hate speech especially
on digital platforms fueling radicalization and conflicts. While reaffirming commitment to sovereignty of
States, they emphasized the importance of information integrity and authenticity and ensuring free flow
of and public access to accurate fact-based information, including the freedom of opinion and expression
as well as digital and media literacy in order to allow for meaningful connectivity, in accordance with
applicable national and international law. The ministers further emphasized the need to foster a unified
framework for action at the multilateral level.
39. The Ministers emphasised the need for a comprehensive reform of the global financial architecture to
enhance the voice of the developing countries and their representation in the international financial
institutions. They reaffirmed the call to ensure that the reform of the International Financial Institutions
would focus on increasing the scale of finance and enable simplified access to resources, especially to
developing and least developed countries. They looked forward to a successful 2025 shareholding Review
of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in line with the Lima Shareholding
principles. They supported a robust Global Financial Safety Net with a strong quota-based and adequately
resourced International Monetary Fund (IMF) at its center. They noted the quota increase at the 16th
OFFICIAL

--- Page 8 ---
OFFICIAL
General Review of Quotas and urged IMF members to secure domestic approvals to make quota increase
effective. They called on continuing the process of IMF governance reform and quota shares realignment
including by creating a new quota formula reflecting the economic size of its membership by June 2025
under the 17th General Review of Quotas with the purpose of increasing the voice and representation of
EMDEs members.
40. The Ministers underscored the importance of the enhanced use of local currencies in trade and
financial settlements between BRICS countries and their trade partners. They recalled the paragraph 66
of the Kazan Declaration tasking the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, as appropriate, to
continue consideration of the issue of local currencies, payment instruments and platforms and report back
to the BRICS Leaders, including by studying the feasibility of BRICS Cross-Border payments initiative,
BRICS Clear and of reinforcing the BRICS reinsurance capacity.
41. The Ministers recognized the key role of the New Development Bank (NDB) in promoting
infrastructure and sustainable development of its member countries, and welcomed the outcomes as
achieved by the NDB in the context of its 10th anniversary. They encouraged the New Development Bank
to follow the member-led and demand-driven principle, employ innovative financing mechanisms to
mobilize financing from diversified sources, enhance capacity building and knowledge exchange,
including with knowledge sources from developing countries, assist member countries in achieving the
SDGs and further improve efficiency and effectiveness to fulfil its mandate, aiming to be a premier
multilateral development institution for EMDCs. They emphasized the importance of continuously
expanding local currency financing and strengthening innovation in investment and financing tools and
acknowledging the initiative to create new investment platform to boost investment flows into BRICS
countries and the Global South mechanisms. They agreed to jointly develop the New Development Bank
to a new type of Multilateral Development Banks of the 21st century. The Ministers recalled paragraph
62 of the Kazan Declaration on the leaders support for expedited consideration of applications of BRICS
countries to become members of the NDB and reiterated their support to the further expansion of the NDB
membership and early consideration of applications of BRICS Member countries in line with NDB
General Strategy for 2022-2026 and its related policies. They welcomed the unanimous reelection of
former Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff as President of the NDB for an additional five-year term.
42. The Ministers reaffirmed the important role of the G20 as the premier forum for international
economic cooperation that comprises both emerging and developed economies, working on the basis of
consensus and jointly seeking solutions to global challenges to the achievement of universally beneficial,
resilient and inclusive global economic growth. They reasserted the need for the G20 to function on an
inclusive, equal and mutually beneficial footing. They reiterated their commitment to a balanced approach
by continuing to amplify the voice of Global South and further integrate their priorities in the G20 agenda.
The Ministers also reiterated that the consecutive G20 presidencies of Indonesia, India, Brazil and South
Africa in 2022-2025 lay a solid ground for addressing inequalities, imbalances and shortcomings in the
world economy as well as for resisting protectionist measures. In this regard they welcomed the four
priorities of South Africa as Chair Country of the G20: disaster resilience and response; debt sustainability
for low-income countries; finance for just energy transitions; critical minerals for inclusive growth and
sustainable development. The Ministers also acknowledged the importance of strengthening international
cooperation in the critical mineral sector, including through downstreaming industrial policy, technology
transfer, and sustainable practices, to ensure that these resources contribute to inclusive and equitable
development, particularly for source countries. The Ministers welcomed the strengthening of the voice of
the Global South in the G20 through the accession of the African Union and the invitation of the NDB
during EMEs presidencies.
43. The Ministers reiterated their call for further cooperation in agriculture in order to ensure global food
security and nutrition, especially at national and local levels and promote rural revitalization and
development. In this regard, the Ministers recognized the importance of strengthening international
cooperation on sustainable vegetable oils, and welcomed ongoing efforts to promote sustainability,
inclusivity, and equitable market access in the global vegetable oil sector. Also, they welcomed the
OFFICIAL

--- Page 9 ---
OFFICIAL
establishment of the BRICS Partnership on Land Restoration and the Global Alliance against Hunger and
Poverty. They re-emphasized the importance of the full implementation of Addis-Ababa Action Agenda
adopted at the Third International Conference on Financing for Development in 2015 and the effective
participation of developing countries in the Fourth International Conference on Financing for
Development, which will be held in Spain from 30 June to 3 July 2025. They further urged developed
countries to honor their commitment to financing for development, including to fully deliver on their
respective ODA commitments in full and on time to contribute to addressing the financing needs of
developing countries.
44. The Ministers welcomed the progress in the ongoing negotiations of the Strategy for BRICS Economic
Partnership 2030, building upon and updating the previous version of the document agreed during the
Russian Presidency in 2020.
45. The Ministers acknowledged the pivotal role of the Partnership on the New Industrial Revolution
(PartNIR) in fostering BRICS cooperation by identifying shared industrial interests, challenges, and
opportunities, and by promoting structured collaboration among members. They expressed appreciation
for the valuable technical discussions on key topics such as digital transformation of industry, intelligent
manufacturing and robotics (IMR), SME development, sovereign AI for digital industrialization,
bioindustry, circular economy, photovoltaic industry and medical equipment. They reiterated their
commitment to enhancing and facilitating further cooperation in these areas, with a special focus on
inclusive training and capacity building, aiming at the continuous technological upgrading of member
countries’ industrial sectors. They encouraged intra-BRICS cooperation through BRICS PartNIR
Innovation Center (BPIC), BRICS Center for Industrial Competences (BCIC) and BRICS Startup Forum
hosted by India in 2025.
46. The Ministers recognized that climate change represents an urgent challenge of our time and that
addressing it requires progress towards sustainable development through 2030 and the mobilization of
global resources to tackle structural inequalities within and among countries, provision of means of
implementation to developing countries from developed countries, paving the way for just transitions
towards low-emission and climate resilient societies, building on the Paris Agreement and relevant
decisions of the UNFCCC COP 27, COP 28 and COP 29, such as Outcome of the first global stocktaking
and the New Collective Quantified Goal on Climate Finance. They further recognized that climate change
is a grave threat to all developing countries. They reiterated that BRICS is willing and ready to contribute
its best effort in addressing climate challenge, through cooperation with all countries. They recognized
the BRICS Contact Group on Climate Change and Sustainable Development as an effective mechanism
of BRICS cooperation on climate change issues, including through the implementation of the Framework
on Climate Change and Sustainable Development.
47. Deeply concerned that trends towards unilateralism, trade protectionism and fragmentation of
international cooperation jeopardize trust and, consequently, ambitious climate action, the Ministers
reaffirmed their commitment to multilateralism, especially in the light of the progress made under the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement and resolved to remain united in the pursuit of efforts to achieve the
purpose and long-term goals of the Paris Agreement and the objectives of the UNFCCC. They called on
all countries to uphold their existing commitment as Parties of the Paris Agreement and to maintain and
scale up their effort to combat climate change. They reiterated that the objectives, principles and
provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), its Kyoto
Protocol and its Paris Agreement, including its principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities (CBDR-RC) in the light of different national circumstances,
must be honored.
48. The Ministers reaffirmed their steadfast commitments, in pursuit of the objective of UNFCCC, to
tackle climate change by strengthening the full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement,
including its provisions related to mitigation, adaptation and the provision of means of implementation to
developing countries, reflecting equity and the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities, in light of different national circumstances.
OFFICIAL

--- Page 10 ---
OFFICIAL
49. The Ministers also recalled that the UNFCCC, including the annual Conference of the Parties (COP)
sessions, is the appropriate and legitimate international forum to discuss the issue of climate change in all
its dimensions. As such, the Ministers expressed their support for Brazil’s leadership in hosting COP30
and welcomed India’s candidacy to host COP 33 in 2028. They affirmed their full commitment to a
successful COP30 that will revitalize multilateral climate diplomacy and catalyze the transition from
negotiations into concrete, inclusive action to implement the UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement. Ministers
also expressed support to Azerbaijan and Brazil, in guiding the “Baku to Belém Roadmap to 1.3T” aiming
at scaling up climate finance to developing countries.
50. The Ministers emphasized that ensuring accessible, timely and affordable climate finance is critical
for enabling just transitions pathways that combine climate action with sustainable development. They
urged developed countries to fulfill their obligations under the Convention and advance the
implementation of the decision on new collective quantified goal on climate finance (NCQG) adopted at
COP29 and fully deliver on their commitments to provide financial resources to assist developing
countries, taking into account the needs and priorities of developing countries. They also underlined the
importance of a refocused effort for enhancing the role of the private sector in addressing climate change,
in a manner that complements public funding, through innovative financial instruments, blended finance,
and supporting capacity building initiatives and targeted concessional finance. Recognizing the cross-
cutting nature of climate finance, they took note of the proposal for a Leader’s Framework Declaration,
which is intended to lead a global mobilization for a fairer and more effective climate finance system, as
a critical enabler for just transition pathways.
51. The Ministers rejected unilateral, punitive and discriminatory protectionist measures, that are not in
line with international law, under the pretext of environmental concerns, such as unilateral and
discriminatory carbon border adjustment mechanisms (CBAMs), due diligence requirements, taxes and
other measures and reconfirmed full support for the call in COP28 related to avoidance of unilateral trade
measures based on climate or environment. The Ministers also opposed unilateral protectionist measures,
which deliberately disrupt the global supply and production chains and distort competition.
52. The Ministers took note of the proposal, under debate in the CGCCSD, to establish a BRICS
Laboratory on Trade, Climate Change and Sustainable Development, to promote collaboration on
mutually supportive approaches to trade and environmental policy. The Ministers looked forward to
advancing the implementation of the 2024 BRICS Carbon Market Partnership MoU to strengthen
collaboration among BRICS members. This partnership will facilitate cooperation in the field of carbon
markets, with a specific focus on capacity-building and exchange of experiences.
53. The Ministers reaffirmed the importance of the effective implementation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and its Protocols, as well as its Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework,
adopted thereunder. They emphasized that the BRICS played a crucial role during the Sixteenth Meeting
of the Conference of the Parties to reach an agreement on resource mobilization in line with their
respective national and regional negotiating positions. The Ministers took note of the plans to launch the
Tropical Forests Forever Facility (TFFF) and acknowledged it as an innovative tool for forest conservation.
The ministers appreciate the establishment of the Kunming Biodiversity Fund and the contribution made
by China.
54. The Ministers recognized that desertification including sand and dust storms, land degradation and
drought are serious challenges posing threats to the well-being and livelihoods of peoples, in particular in
many developing countries, and underlined the importance of international cooperation, necessary
resources and knowledge/technology-sharing to face with those challenges. They reiterated their firm
commitment in implementing United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
55. The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to actively and constructively engage, in the spirit of
collaboration and consensus-building, and with a sense of urgency and solidarity in the ongoing
negotiation of an international legally binding instrument on plastic pollution, including in the marine
environment, as per UNEA resolution 5/14 and seek to reach common ground on a fair, effective, and
OFFICIAL

--- Page 11 ---
OFFICIAL
balanced international legally binding instrument through the International Negotiating Committee,
ensuring just transitions whereby no one is left behind. They stressed that its effectiveness will depend on
the provision of adequate means of implementation, which includes the establishment of an independent
and dedicated multilateral fund contributed by developed countries to assist developing countries, with
international cooperation in science, advanced technology, innovation, and environmental education
aimed at developing and sharing innovative and sustainable solutions.
56. The Ministers emphasized that Artificial Intelligence (AI) is instrumental for promoting socio-
economic development and inclusive growth in all societies and, for this purpose, it is important to ensure
that AI is designed, developed, and used in a responsible, safe, secure, and ethical manner. They agreed
that the global governance of AI must mitigate potential risks and address the needs of all countries,
especially those of the Global South. It must operate under national regulatory frameworks and the UN
Charter, respect sovereignty as well as be representative, development-oriented, accessible, inclusive,
dynamic, responsive, grounded in personal data protection, the rights and interests of humanity, safety,
transparency, sustainability, and conducive to overcoming the growing digital and data divides, within
and between countries. In this context, the Ministers called for strengthening AI international governance
through the United Nations system as a fully inclusive and representative international framework and
encouraged policy exchanges and dialogues on AI, with a view to spur innovation and promote economic
growth.
57. The Ministers looked forward to BRICS cooperation to help developing countries strengthen AI
capacity building. They reiterated the UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/78/311 – Enhancing
International Cooperation on Capacity-building of Artificial Intelligence. The Ministers also stressed the
importance of promoting open-source development and international scientific and technological
cooperation as key enablers to building capacities in AI research, development, innovation, data
protection, data sovereignty and deployment.
58. Recognizing the growing significance of data as a driver of economic growth, job creation, innovation,
sovereignty and sustainable development, the Ministers commended the growing consensus on the BRICS
Data Economy Governance Understanding, which aims to establish a roadmap of future work areas to
explore commonalities and leverage the data economy across BRICS.
59. The Ministers noted the increasing relevance of the interface between sustainable development and
global health issues, while recognizing that international health cooperation shall be inclusive, based on
equity and result-oriented for the benefit of all people. They reaffirmed that the global health architecture
should be open, inclusive, science and evidence based, depoliticised and based on the principles of equity
and transparency, equality, mutual respect, in line with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, and
with due respect to the sovereignty and interests of all countries. They underscored the leadership role of
the World Health Organization (WHO) as the directing and coordinating authority on international health
work. They stressed the need to uphold and strengthen the WHO, ensuring it remains a robust, responsive,
and sustainably-financed institution capable of effectively fulfilling its mandate. They reaffirmed their
commitment to intensify efforts at national level towards achieving universal health coverage, including
improving equitable access to quality essential health services and safe, effective, quality and affordable
essential medicines and vaccines for all. The Ministers acknowledged that BRICS cooperation on
countering TB and AMR as well as strengthening capacities in preventing communicable and non-
communicable diseases and other health issues experience sharing including on traditional medicine
systems, digital health greatly contributes to relevant international efforts. They agreed to support
intensified efforts to address socially determined diseases, along with other health challenges that
disproportionately impact the Global South, and took note of the ongoing work on the launch of the
BRICS Partnership for the Elimination of Socially Determined Diseases. The Ministers welcomed the
conclusion of the negotiation of a pandemic agreement in the World Health Organization and look forward
to the successful conclusion of the negotiation of its Annex on Pathogen Access and Benefit-Sharing
System.
OFFICIAL

--- Page 12 ---
OFFICIAL
60. The Ministers reaffirmed the importance of BRICS people-to-people exchanges in enhancing mutual
understanding, friendship and cooperation. They acknowledged that people-to-people exchanges play an
essential role in enriching our societies and developing our economies. In this regard, they called for more
efforts to respect diversity of cultures, highly value inheritance, innovation and creativity, jointly advocate
robust international people-to-people exchanges and cooperation.
61. The Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening BRICS through continued discussions
on the group's institutional development. They emphasized the importance of supporting partner countries
to participate in BRICS cooperation in accordance with the Modalities of BRICS Partner Country
Category adopted during the BRICS Summit at Kazan, Russia. Given the recent expansion of the group,
they recognized the importance of tapping the potential of BRICS cooperation through institutional
development. They took note of the need to establish a common BRICS database to facilitate access to
relevant documents and background information. They underscored their strong belief that extending the
BRICS partnership with EMDCs will further contribute to strengthening the spirit of solidarity and true
international cooperation for the benefit of all.
62. The Ministers expressed their full support to Brazil’s BRICS Chairship in 2025 under the theme
“Strengthening Global South Cooperation for More Inclusive and Sustainable Governance”. They
expressed their commitment to working together to ensure the success of the XVII BRICS Summit. The
Ministers looked forward to the next BRICS Ministers of Foreign Affairs/International Relations meeting
to be held on the margins of UNGA 80 and hosted by India as incoming Chair of BRICS in 2026.
Itamaraty Palace, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
29 April 2025
OFFICIAL

