--- Page 1 ---
Brief on Activities of BRICS Anti-Corruption Working Group in 2024
The Russian Federation held the BRICS Chairmanship from 1 January through 31 December
2024. It sought to ensure continuity of activities of the BRICS Anti-Corruption Working Group
(ACWG) and complementarity of its work with other major multilateral anti-corruption formats
with due regard to the national anti-corruption priorities of its members, particularly, after the
important expansion of the forum on 1 January 2024. Building on the ACWG’s legacy, Russia
suggested focusing on the following priorities, which was supported by consensus by BRICS:
1. Strengthen BRICS coordination in asset recovery and enhance the effectiveness of
international cooperation, including in mutual legal assistance, under the UN Convention against
Corruption (UNCAC);
2. Organise BRICS knowledge-sharing initiatives on specific aspects of the prevention of and
fight against corruption; and
3. Step up coordination, formulate and promote the BRICS common position on other key issues
on the international anti-corruption agenda, in particular, on the second phase of the UNCAC
Implementation Review Mechanism.
In order to implement these priorities, the Russian Chairmanship convened three in-person
meetings of the ACWG: on 17-18 April in Moscow, and on 6-7 June and 26-27 August in
Vienna back-to-back with the meetings of the subsidiary bodies of the Conference of the States
Parties to the UNCAC.
Additionally, the following side events were organised on the occasion of the ACWG’s meetings
respectively:
1) Special Event on Asset Recovery and International Cooperation under the UN Convention
against Corruption;
2) Special Event on Anti-Corruption Education, Training and Youth Empowerment, supported by
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); and
3) International Conference “Safeguarding Sport from Corruption: Focus on BRICS Countries”,
in cooperation with UNODC.
Based on the discussions in the ACWG’s meetings and the outputs of the special events, the
Group drafted and adopted two key deliverables of the Russian Chairmanship on the BRICS
anti-corruption track, namely the position document “Enhanced Anti-Corruption Cooperation
and Recovery and Return of Assets and Proceeds of Corruption: BRICS Common Vision and
Joint Action” and “BRICS Cooperation in Anti-Corruption Education, Knowledge-Sharing and
Capacity-Building: Achievements and Way Forward”. Additionally, the ACWG elaborated an
Analytical Note on Asset Recovery in BRICS Countries, the first and unique deliverable of this
kind issued by the Group. The document is based on the information provided by the BRICS
competent authorities and defines, inter alia, the most important challenges that BRICS
encounter in repatriating proceeds of crime and ways to address them.
The ACWG’s achievements in 2024 were welcomed by the BRICS Leaders in the Kazan
Declaration. Brazil, taking over the Chairmanship from Russia, expressed its intention to
preserve the continuity of the ACWG agenda.

