--- Page 1 ---
PL
G20 SOUTH AFRICA 2025 SHERPA TRACK | Anti-Corruption Working Group

--- Page 2 ---
G20 ACWG 2025 Accountability Report on Whistleblower Protection
I. INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................... 3
A. OBJECTIVE ............................................................................................................... 3
B. POLICY CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 3
C. METHODOLOGY ........................................................................................................ 4
D. KEY FINDINGS........................................................................................................... 5
II. PILLAR 1: LEGAL IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK (Q1-2) ............................ 8
III. PILLAR 2: SCOPE OF PROTECTED DISCLOSURES (Q3-5) ........................... 12
IV. PILLAR 3: PROCEDURE FOR PROTECTED DISCLOSURES (Q6-12) ............ 16
A. ORGANISATIONAL CULTURE .................................................................................... 17
B. MONITORING OF INTERNAL REPORTING CHANNELS ..................................................... 18
C. DIRECT REPORTING TO LAW ENFORCEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR INTERNAL DISCLOSURE ..... 20
D. SAFEGUARDS AGAINST CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENTS BLOCKING REPORTING ............... 21
E. CONFIDENTIALITY OF REPORTING PERSONS, REPORTS, AND PROVISIONS FOR
ANONYMOUS REPORTING ............................................................................................. 21
V. PILLAR 4: REMEDIES AND EFFECTIVE PROTECTION AGAINST
RETALIATION (Q13-17) .......................................................................................... 23
VI. PILLAR 5: EFFECTIVENESS, ENFORCEMENT, AND EVALUATION OF THE
LEGAL FRAMEWORK (Q18-26) ............................................................................. 28
VII. PROTECTIONS IN PRACTICE .......................................................................... 34
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND PROPOSED FUTURE AREAS FOR CONSIDERATION
. ............................................................................................................................... 35
REFERENCES ......................................................................................................... 37
ANNEX 1. G20 ANTI-CORRUPTION WORKING GROUP QUESTIONNAIRE ON
THE 2019 G20 HIGH-LEVEL PRINCIPLES FOR THE EFFECTIVE PROTECTION
OF WHISTLEBLOWERS ......................................................................................... 39
Box 1. Examples from Portugal and South Africa ................................................. 9
Box 2. India’s interpretation of the “good faith” principle ...................................... 15
Box 3. Republic of Korea: Limitations and exclusions for protections
Box 4. Norway: Explicit requirement in legislation for a satisfactory climate
Box 5. Monitoring internal reporting channels in Australia, India and the
Republic of Korea
1

--- Page 3 ---
Box 6. Brazil's reporting platform
Box 7. Prohibited retaliations in France ............................................................... 24
Box 8. Sanctions for retaliating against reporting persons in Indonesia .......... 26
Box 9. Spain’s Independent Authority for the Protection of Whistleblowers ..... 29
Box 10. Frameworks for facilitating whistleblower reports and protections
while protecting personal data ............................................................................. 30
Box 11. Examples of systems to assess the effectiveness and impact of
whistleblower protection frameworks .................................................................. 33
Box 12. Highlights of statistics on protections in practice ................................. 35
Table 1. Country legislative frameworks for whistleblower protections .............. 9
Table 2. Country responses on protections at work and third parties ............... 22
Table 3. Country responses on good faith/reasonable grounds requirement ... 26
Table 4. Country approaches to anonymous reporting (Q12) ............................ 27
Table 5. Country examples on the burden of proof in whistleblower retaliation
cases
Table 6. Country responses regarding remedies and effective protection
against retaliation
Figure 1. Does your country provide for the burden of proof to be shifted to the
person that has taken detrimental actions? (Yes/No) ......................................... 26
2

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction
A. Objective
Effective protection of whistleblowers and handling protected disclosures are central
to promoting public and private sector integrity, supporting an open organisational
culture and preventing and detecting bribery and corruption1. Whistleblowers play an
essential role in exposing fraud, corruption and other offences, often compromising
financial and professional stability and, at times, personal safety.
These are some of the reasons why the South African Presidency of the 2025 G20
has identified enhancing whistleblower protection mechanisms as one of its core
priorities for the G20 Anti-Corruption Working Group (ACWG) and chosen to make this
the focus of the G20 ACWG Accountability Report 2025.
The G20 ACWG Accountability Report is a self-reporting mechanism for countries to
demonstrate progress made towards their commitments and areas for improvement.
The G20 ACWG Accountability Report 2025 aims to provide an overview of the
implementation by G20 countries of the 2019 G20 High-Level Principles for the
Effective Protection of Whistleblowers2 and to facilitate the sharing of country
experiences in this regard. The Report is based on country responses to an agreed-
upon questionnaire and aims to facilitate the exchange of experiences and practices
in developing and implementing legal and institutional frameworks for the protection of
persons reporting corruption cases.
B. Policy context
The G20 High-Level Principles for the Effective Protection of Whistleblowers were
developed during Japan’s Presidency in 2019. The 11 principles included in the High-
Level Principles represent the G20 ACWG’s recognition of the baseline elements
governments can consider when developing a legal and institutional framework for
protecting reporting persons.
The 2019 G20 High-Level Principles and the G20 ACWG Accountability Report 2025
are supported by international standards on whistleblower protection. This includes
the United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), in particular its article
33,3 resolution 10/8, entitled “Protection of Reporting Persons”, adopted at the tenth
session of the Conference of the States Parties (COSP) to UNCAC in December
1 OECD (2011) Study on G20 Whistleblower Protection Frameworks: Compendium of Best Practices and Guiding
Principles for Legislation. Available at: https://star.worldbank.org/publications/protection-whistleblowers-
study-whistleblower-protection-frameworks-compendium-best (Accessed 27 Aug 2025)
2 The G20 High-Level Principles were developed under Japan’s 2019 G20 Presidency and endorsed by the G20
countries. Japan (2019) G20 High-Level Principles for the Effective Protection of Whistleblowers Available at:
https://www.unodc.org/documents/corruption/G20-Anti-Corruption-Resources/Thematic-Areas/Public-Sector-
Integrity-and-Transparency/G20_High-
Level_Principles_for_the_Effective_Protection_of_Whistleblowers_2019.pdf (Accessed 28 Aug 2025)
3 Article 33 of UNCAC states that each State Party shall consider incorporating into its domestic legal system
appropriate measures to provide protection against any unjustified treatment for any person who reports in good
faith and on reasonable grounds to the competent authorities any facts concerning offences established in
accordance with this Convention.
3

--- Page 5 ---
20234, as well as the OECD Anti-Bribery Recommendation (Sections XXI-XXII)5 and
the OECD Recommendation on Public Integrity (Principle 9)6.
C. Methodology
Responses to the questionnaire on implementation of the High-Level Principles were
received from 22 G20 and invited countries: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Spain, South Africa,
Türkiye and United Kingdom.7 Countries were also invited to refer to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) questionnaire on good practices and
challenges for the protection of reporting persons circulated between December 2024
and March 20258, which led to the development of an international study on challenges
and good practices on the protection of reporting persons that was presented at the
sixteenth session of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on the
Prevention of Corruption in June 2025, as requested by COSP resolution 10/8.
Responses to the UNODC questionnaire have complemented country contributions to
this report.
The G20 ACWG questionnaire and country responses are annexed to this report and
will be published online.
The following sections provide an overview of countries’ responses to the G20 ACWG
questionnaire structured around the five pillars of the High-Level Principles: (i) legal
framework, ii) scope of protected persons, iii) procedure for protected disclosures, iv)
remedies and effective protection against retaliation, and v) effective enforcement and
self-evaluation of the legal framework, as well as two questions to assess the
implementation of whistleblower protection in practice.
This report was developed under the leadership of the South African G20 Presidency
with the support of the OECD, AfDB, and UNODC.9
4 Conference of the States Parties (COSP) resolution 10/8. Available at:
https://www.unodc.org/corruption/en/cosp/conference/session10-resolutions.html#Res.10-8 (Accessed 27 Aug
2025)
5 OECD Recommendation of the Council for Further Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions (Sections XXI-XXII). Available at:
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/oecd-legal-0378 (Accessed 28 Aug 2025)
6 OECD Recommendation on Public Integrity (Principle 9) Available at:
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0435 (Accessed 28 Aug 2025)
7 For note, Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the
protection of persons who report breaches of Union law (the ‘Whistleblower Protection Directive’) aims to set
minimum standards at EU level. This would include in the European jurisdictions included in this report.
8 Based on a request by the Conference of the States Parties in resolution 10/8 to develop a study on best practices
and challenges identified on the protection of reporting persons, UNODC circulated a note verbale and
questionnaire on the protection of whistle-blowers and other reporting persons. The findings of the study were
presented at the sixteenth session of Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on the Prevention of
Corruption, which was held from 17 to 20 June 2025. The study can be found at:
https://www.unodc.org/corruption/en/cosp/WGP/session16.html
9 For example, Article 5(5) of the African Union Convention for the Prevention and Combating of Corruption
(AUCPCC) provides that state parties should adopt legislative and other measures to protect informants and
witnesses in corruption and related offences, including protection of their identities.
4

--- Page 6 ---
D. Key findings
The 2025 G20 Accountability Report confirms that member countries have made
significant progress in implementing the 2019 High-Level Principles on the Effective
Protection of Whistleblowers. However, important variations remain in scope,
procedures, and enforcement. The following is a synthesis of findings across the five
pillars:
1. Legal Frameworks:
Most G20 countries have comprehensive whistleblower protection laws. Some
have dedicated standalone laws, while others combine a dedicated public
sector law with separate private sector provisions. Most OECD countries apply
the EU Directive in Law 93/2021, which has a broad sectoral coverage.
2. Scope of Protected Disclosures and Persons:
Most countries protect disclosures covering a wide range of wrongdoing: fraud,
corruption, health & safety, and environmental violations. Protection often
extends to persons beyond current employees, including those whose
employment has ended, those in recruitment stages, and associated third
parties.
3. Good Faith vs Reasonable Grounds:
Over half the G20 countries require disclosures made in good faith and/or
reasonable belief. A limited number of countries no longer require good faith
but do require a reasonable belief that the disclosure is in the public interest.
4. Reporting Procedures:
Most G20 countries permit whistleblowers to report directly to law enforcement
or competent authorities without exhausting internal channels, while some
prefer internal reporting but allow external disclosure to prescribed entities,
ministers, legal advisors, or media under exceptional circumstances. A
significant number of countries permit anonymous reporting to protect the
identity and information provided by reporting persons.
5. Confidentiality and Anonymous Reporting:
Most countries mandate the confidentiality of whistleblower identity and report
details. Anonymous reporting is widely accepted with varying follow-up
requirements.
6. Protection Against Retaliation:
Retaliation is prohibited in all twenty-one countries that responded to the
questionnaire, with applicable sanctions ranging from civil, administrative, to
criminal penalties. Remedies include compensation and reinstatement. In some
countries, there is a legal requirement in the whistleblower act or other
legislation permitting the courts to consider the shift in burden of proof to the
alleged retaliator.
5

--- Page 7 ---
7. Enforcement Institutions and Evaluation:
More than half of the countries have dedicated bodies to implement
whistleblower protections, while some rely on multiple prescribed persons
(regulators) instead of a single authority. A significant number of countries
reported that they conduct periodic reviews and training to improve frameworks.
8. Protections in Practice:
Data on whistleblower activity is uneven across countries. Only a handful of
countries provided data on the percentage of reported cases that were linked
to whistleblower protection and circumstances where anonymity was required.
Proposed Future Areas for Consideration
Pillar I
Dedicated Legal Frameworks: Countries can enact more dedicated legal
frameworks for the protection of reporting persons in both private and public sectors.
The legal frameworks should aim at a minimum to cover a wide range of material and
personnel scope.
Pillar II
• Expanding Coverage: Extend protections to former employees, individuals in
advanced recruitment stages, third parties connected to whistleblowers, and
informal or non-traditional work arrangements to close protection gaps.
• Clarifying Good Faith/Reasonable Grounds Standards: Countries can
develop clearer definitions and legal frameworks on “good faith” and
“reasonable grounds” to enhance legal certainty.
Pillar III
• Enhancing Confidentiality and Anonymous Reporting: Strengthen uniform
standards and mechanisms to protect whistleblower identities and support
effective anonymous reporting to bolster reporting confidence.
• Countries can cultivate organisational cultures that foster trust and enhance
open reporting. Fostering organisation culture remains a critical dimension that
requires sustained efforts across the public and private sectors, along with
tailored measures to address diverse needs, including gender considerations.
• Addressing Gender-Sensitive Reporting: Integrate gender-sensitive and
inclusivity considerations into reporting channels and protection measures.
Pillar IV
• Shifting Burden of Proof and Remedy Improvements: Advocate wider
adoption and application of provisions on shifting the burden, also with
accessible and timely remedies, including interim relief and compensation
covering both direct and indirect retaliation effects.
Pillar V
• Capacity Building and Resourcing: Invest consistently in training and
resourcing of authorities and organisations entrusted with whistleblower
protections to ensure proficient, impartial, and independent enforcement.
6

--- Page 8 ---
• Gaps in Transition and Developing Countries: Provide technical support to
address the gaps in the implementation of whistleblower protection in
developing countries, particularly in Africa. This would provide an opportunity
to undertake technical assistance similar to the asset recovery measures.
• Balancing Data Privacy and Transparency: Develop harmonised
frameworks balancing data protection laws with whistleblower confidentiality
and reporting efficacy to avoid undue barriers.
• International Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing: Enhance cross-border
collaboration, peer learning, and technical assistance among G20 countries to
disseminate best practices and elevate whistleblower protections globally.
• Enhancing Evaluation, Periodic Assessments and Data on
Whistleblowing: Whistleblowing laws should provide for regular evaluations
and periodic assessments as well as a clear requirement for governments to
maintain, publish and retain relevant data to support actions taken to protect
reporting persons.
7

--- Page 9 ---
II. Pillar 1: Legal Implementation Framework (Q1-2)
Pillar 1 calls on countries to establish comprehensive legal frameworks and policies
for the protection of whistleblowers, and preferably a dedicated framework. Principle
1 also calls on countries to encourage organisations to establish and implement
protections and provide guidance on the elements of these protections.
According to country responses, most G20 countries have a legislative framework in
place for the protection of whistleblowers. In many jurisdictions, whistleblowers can
report a wide range of misconduct across both the public and private sectors, and most
categories of personnel are eligible for protection. In most responding countries, these
protections are established through standalone laws or policies, while in others, the
framework is drawn from multiple legal or policy sources.
For example, India applies a whistle-blower resolution and Canada applies a dedicated
law for the public sector, complemented by additional provisions for the private sector.
In Brazil, there is a law on the protection of users of public services, supplemented
with other legal provisions, including a decree on safeguards to protect the identity of
whistleblowers reporting illegal acts and irregularities committed against the federal
public administration. The Republic of Korea has a dedicated whistleblower protection
framework through the Public Interest Whistleblower Protection Act, complemented by
the anti-corruption act and several related laws that extend protections to both public
and private sectors. South Africa has a dedicated whistleblower protection law, the
Protected Disclosures Act, which applies across public and private sectors, but
protections are also reinforced through other legislation such as the Prevention and
Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, the Companies Act, the Financial Intelligence
Centre Act, and the Labour Relations Act. In China, regulations apply broadly to all
citizens, without distinguishing between public and private sector whistleblowers.
Moreover, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has adopted a dedicated, comprehensive
framework for the protection of individuals reporting wrongdoing with the enactment of
the "Law on the Protection of Informants, Witnesses, Experts, and Victims". The law
applies to both the public and private sectors. The scope of the law covers information
or evidence related to the commission of major offences requiring detention under law.
A "Reporting Person" (also known as a whistleblower) is defined as an individual who
voluntarily discloses information or provides evidence indicating that a crime has been,
is being, or can be committed, or identifies those involved in a crime. Protection is
provided to a broad range of individuals, including reporting persons, witnesses,
experts, and victims, and additionally close relatives (spouses, relatives of the
protected person, and any other persons whose close relationship with the informants,
witnesses, experts, or victims might expose them to danger or harm). Protection also
extends to former employees and individuals in advanced recruitment who suffer
consequences due to reporting wrongdoing.
8

--- Page 10 ---
Table 1. Country legislative frameworks for whistleblower protections10
Countries Laws/Policies/ Dedicated (D) /Multiple Public sector
Regulations (M) sources of protections (PU)
law/policies Private sector
protections (PR)
Both (B)
Australia M B
Brazil M B
Canada D PU
China M Not specified
France D B
Germany D B
India D+M B
Ireland D B
Italy D B
Japan D B
Republic of D+M B
Korea
Netherlands D B
Nigeria M B
Norway M B
Portugal D B
Russia M B
Saudi Arabia D B
South Africa D+M B
Spain D B
Türkiye M B
United Kingdom P D B
Box 1. Examples from Portugal and South Africa
Portugal
The whistleblower protection framework in Portugal consists of:
• Law 93/2021 of 20 December, which establishes the general regime for the
protection of whistleblowers, transposing Directive (EU) 2017/1937 of the
European Parliament and of the Council, of 23 October 2019, on the
protection of persons who report breaches of Union Law.
• Decree-Law 109-E/2021, of 9 December, which establishes the National Anti-
Corruption Mechanism (MENAC) and the general regime for the prevention
of corruption.
o MENAC’s 2023 guide on the instruments of the general regime on the
prevention of corruption, available here.
o MENAC’s recommendations, available here.
10 Tables included in this report reflect only the countries that provided responses to the G20 ACWG on these
questions.
9

--- Page 11 ---
o MENAC’s guidelines, available here.
o MENAC’s information about the general regime on the prevention of
corruption platform, available here.
The legal framework on whistleblowers applies to both the public and the private
sector.
The wrongdoings covered by Law 93/2021, of 20 December, are foreseen in article
2, namely paragraph 1 (material scope):
a) the act or omission contrary to rules contained in the acts of the European Union
referred to in the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament
and of the Council, to national rules implementing, transposing or complying with
such acts or to any other rules contained in legislative acts implementing or
transposing them, including those providing for crimes or administrative offences,
concerning the fields of:
i) Public procurement;
ii) Financial services, products and markets and prevention of money
laundering and terrorist financing;
iii) Product safety and compliance;
iv) Transport safety;
v) Environmental protection;
vi) Radiation protection and nuclear safety;
vii) Food and feed safety, animal health and animal welfare;
viii) Public health;
ix) Consumer protection;
x) Protection of privacy and personal data and security of network and
information systems;
b) the act or omission contrary to and detrimental to the financial interests of the
European Union referred to in Article 325 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (TFEU), as specified in the applicable Union measures;
c) the act or omission contrary to the internal market rules referred to in Article 26(2)
TFEU, including competition and state aid rules, as well as corporate tax rules;
d) violent crime, especially violent and highly organised crime, as well as the crimes
provided for in Article 1(1) of Law 5/2002, of 11 January, establishing measures to
combat organised and economic-financial crime; and
e) the act or omission contrary to the purpose of the rules or norms covered by
paragraphs a) to c).
The categories of persons covered by Law 93/2021, of 20 December, are foreseen
in Article 5 and Article 6(4) (personal scope).
As per Article 5, a whistleblower is “a natural person who publicly denounces or
discloses an infraction based on information obtained within the scope of their
professional activity, irrespective of the nature of that activity and the sector in which
it is exercised”.
10

--- Page 12 ---
The following persons may be considered whistleblowers, among others:
a) Workers in the private, social or public sector;
b) Service providers, contractors, subcontractors and suppliers, as well as any
persons acting under their supervision and direction;
c) Shareholders and persons belonging to administrative or management bodies or
to supervisory or controlling bodies of legal persons, including non-executive
members;
(d) Volunteers and interns remunerated or unremunerated.
As per Article 6(4) of the Law 93/2021, of 20 December, the protection conferred by
this Law, is extended, with the necessary adaptations, to:
a) A natural person who assists the whistleblower in the denunciation procedure and
whose assistance must be confidential, including trade union representatives or
workers' representatives;
b) Third parties connected to the whistleblower, such as work colleagues or family
members, who may be the target of retaliation in a professional context; and
c) Legal persons or similar entities that are owned or controlled by the whistleblower,
for which the whistleblower is employed or otherwise connected in a professional
context.
South Africa
The Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000) (the PDA), is South
Africa's primary legislation for whistleblower protection. The PDA deals with, among
others, procedures that must be followed to make protected disclosures (see
sections 5 to 9 of the PDA) and remedies that are available to persons who have
been subjected to occupational detriment (see section 4 of the PDA).
The Act was amended in 2017 to:
• extend the application of the Act to any person who works or worked for the
State or another person or who in any manner assists or assisted in carrying
on or conducting the business of an employer or client as an independent
contractor, consultant, agent, or person rendering services to a client while
being employed by a temporary employment service;
• regulate joint liability of employers and their clients;
• introduce a duty to inform (provide feedback) employees or workers who
have disclosed information regarding unlawful or irregular conduct;
• provide for immunity against civil and criminal liability flowing from a
disclosure of information that shows or tends to show that a criminal offence
has been committed, is being committed, or is reasonably likely to be
committed; and
• create an offence for the disclosure of false information.
On 14 September 2018, the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services (since the
2024 elections, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development) issued
regulations under section 10 of the PDA in terms of which the Minister extended the
list of persons or bodies to whom protected disclosures may be made (Protected
Disclosures Act: Regulations (English/Afrikaans) to include an additional 33
institutions or bodies to whom disclosures may be made. Section 10(4)(a) of the
11

--- Page 13 ---
PDA requires that the Minister must, after consultation with the Minister for the Public
Service and Administration, issue practical guidelines which explain the provisions
of the PDA and all procedures which are available in terms of any law to employees
or workers who wish to report or otherwise remedy an impropriety.
Application of the Protected Disclosures Act in South Africa
The PDA and the regulations issued under the Act apply to the public and private
sectors (see section 2(1)(a) of the PDA).
United Kingdom
Whistleblowing protections in the UK are in Part IVA, section 47B and section 103A
of the Employment Rights Act 1996 (ERA), as amended by the Public Interest
Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA). The ERA protects workers in the public and private
sectors who make “protected disclosures” from being subjected to detriment
(adverse treatment) or if they are employees, dismissal from their employer.
For a worker to receive protection, they must:
• Reasonably believe that a disclosure is “in the public interest”. Generally, this
means that the wrongdoing also affects others (for example, other workers or
the public).
• Make a disclosure about one of more types of wrongdoing listed in the ERA.
These include a criminal offence; failure to comply with a legal obligation;
miscarriage of justice; danger to the health and safety of any individual,
damage to the environment, or the deliberate concealment of information
falling within any of these categories.
• Make the disclosure in line with one of section 43C- 43H ERA, usually to their
employer, another responsible person, or a range of organisations prescribed
in secondary legislation as prescribed persons.
Whistleblowing protections apply to a broader category of workers than would
otherwise be covered under the ERA, such as agency workers; individuals
undertaking training or work experience; self-employed doctors, dentists, and
pharmacists in the National Health Service (NHS); police officers; and student
nurses and student midwives.
III. Pillar 2: Scope of protected disclosures (Q3-5)
Pillar 2 addresses the scope of protected disclosures, the condition of reports to be
made in good faith and on reasonable grounds to qualify for protection, and the
limitations that may apply. Principle 2 of the HLPs encourages countries to adopt a
broad and clear definition of wrongdoing for protected disclosures, clearly specifying
limited exceptions. Disclosures that expose hidden wrongdoing or the deliberate
concealment of such wrongdoing should also be protected. Principle 3 provides that
protection should be available to the broadest range of persons, including, at a
minimum, employees, public officials or workers, regardless of their contractual
12

--- Page 14 ---
relationship. It further affirms that disclosures made outside official employment
relationships to competent authorities should be protected, including where
confidentiality agreements exist.
The HLPs complement article 33 of UNCAC, which requires States Parties to consider
providing protection against unjustified treatment for any person who reports in good
faith and on reasonable grounds. International good practices related to the protection
of whistleblowers call for the use of “reasonable grounds” rather than “good faith”11.
However, in instances where good faith is included in the national frameworks,
resolution 10/8 invites States Parties to interpret this notion as the reporting person’s
reasonable belief that the information reported is true, and without consideration of
personal reasons that may be behind the report.
This is also consistent with the OECD Anti-Bribery Recommendation (XXI-XXII), which
calls for strong and effective legal and institutional frameworks to protect and/or to
provide remedies for the broadest possible range of persons in both the public and
private sectors against retaliation from reporting wrongdoing on reasonable grounds.
It also supports extending protection to the broadest possible range of reporting
persons in a work-related context. They are likewise aligned with the OECD Public
Integrity Recommendation (Principle 9), asking countries to provide clear rules and
procedures for reporting suspected violations of any integrity standards, ensuring
protection against all types of unjustified treatments as a result of reporting in good
faith and on reasonable grounds.
Half of the countries report that their frameworks provide protection to reporting
persons beyond the termination of the work-based relationship, during advanced
stages of recruitment or contractual negotiations, and to third persons associated with
the reporting person who may be subject to retaliation.
Table 2. Country responses on protections at work and third persons
Countries Work-based Advanced stage of Third persons
relationship recruitment (Y/N) connected to the
has ended reporting person
(Y/N) (Y/N)
Australia Y Y Y
Canada N Y N
China N N N
France Y Y Y
Germany Y Y Y
India Y Y Y
Ireland Y Y Y
Italy Y Y Y
Japan Y N N
Republic of Y Y Y
Korea
11 See for instance the European Union Directive of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report
breaches of Union law: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019L1937
13

--- Page 15 ---
Netherlands Y Y Y
Nigeria N N N
Norway N N N
Portugal Y Y Y
Russia Y Y Y
Saudi Arabia Y Y Y
Spain Y Y Y
Türkiye Y Y Y
United Kingdom Y N N
Regarding the range of reporting persons, roughly half of the responding countries
state they provide protection to persons in the public and private sectors, including
former or current workers or those negotiating an employment contract.
More than half of the countries require disclosures to be made in good faith, on
reasonable grounds, or both, to qualify for protection. In Australia and the United
Kingdom, disclosures do not need to be made in good faith; only reasonable grounds
are required. About a third of countries explicitly state that the motive for reporting is
not taken into consideration as long as it is done in good faith and/or on reasonable
grounds. (see Table 3).
Saudi Arabia’s Law on the Protection of Informants, Witnesses, Experts, and Victims
focuses on the act of reporting crimes, which is not strictly limited to current
employment. This law extends protection to those whose work-based relationship has
ended (former employees); [Article 13] the law also covers those who are during the
advanced stages of a recruitment process or contractual negotiations, and who could
suffer retaliation; [Article 1] and third persons connected to the reporting person, who
could suffer retaliation in a work-related context (spouses and relatives of the reporting
person, and any other persons whose close relationship might expose them to danger
or harm).
Table 3. Country responses on the good faith/reasonable grounds requirement
Countries Good faith (GF) / Reasonable grounds (RG), Both (B)
Argentina Not explicitly stated
Australia Not required/ RG
Brazil B
Canada Not explicitly stated
China Not explicitly stated
France B
Germany B
India GF implied
Ireland GF implied
Italy RG
Japan GF implied/ RG
Republic of RG
Korea
14

--- Page 16 ---
Netherlands RG
Nigeria GF implied/RG
Norway B
Portugal B
Russia B
Saudi Arabia B
South Africa B
Spain B
Türkiye No response provided
United Kingdom RG
In several countries, the concept of good faith is recognised in law but not always
explicitly defined in whistleblower protection frameworks. In Nigeria, courts, especially
in contract law, interpret good faith as the absence of bad faith, while the Corrupt
Practices and Other Related Offences Act requires that a whistleblower have
reasonable grounds to believe the information reported is true. In India, the term is not
expressly defined Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers (PIDPI)
Resolution 2004, but its interpretation is guided by established legal principles and
case laws under administrative jurisprudence. In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Article
18 of the Law stipulates that a criminal action may not be brought against an informant,
witness, or expert because of disclosure, except in cases where the report was filed in
bad faith or with gross negligence, or contained knowingly false information. This
explicitly links protection to good faith reporting. While the law does not provide a
specific definition of “good faith”, the reporting person must have a genuine and
reasonable belief that the facts reported are accurate and indicate wrongdoing.
Furthermore, a false report made in bad faith or with gross negligence can lead to the
loss of all protection.
Box 2. India’s interpretation of the “good faith” principle
India
Good faith is guided by established legal principles and case law in both administrative
and corporate contexts. In administrative law, including service jurisprudence, “good
faith” is interpreted under Section 3(22) of the General Clauses Act, 1897: “A thing
shall be deemed to be done in good faith where it is in fact done honestly, whether it
is done negligently or not.” Indian courts have further clarified that honesty of purpose,
absence of ulterior motive, and diligent fact-checking are key indicators of good faith.
In the private sector, company whistleblower policies often reference “good faith” and
define it in operational terms.
Roughly half of the countries report applying different kinds of limitations and
exclusions for protections. These include disclosures involving classified information,
professional secrecy (medical or legal), law enforcement confidentiality, judicial
deliberation secrecy, state security interests, or data protection requirements. Some
countries, for instance, Spain, also exclude cases where information has been rejected
by internal reporting channels, relates to interpersonal conflicts, only concerns the
informant and the persons involved, or consists of information already public or mere
15

--- Page 17 ---
rumours. Under Turkish law, applications intended to burden employers or cause
undue difficulty are prohibited. Additionally, applications using another person’s
identity, lacking legal capacity, based solely on speculation without evidence, or
repeatedly submitted in a similar manner to abuse rights, are also not processed. In
Korea, whistleblower protection is denied if reports are knowingly false or made for
financial gain.
Box 3. Republic of Korea: Limitations and exclusions for protections
Republic of Korea
Evidence of public interest infringement should be attached to the report. If a public
interest violation report is made despite knowing or being able to know that the content
of the report is false, and if a report is made for money, preferential treatment for work,
or other illegal purposes, the report shall not be regarded as a report for public interest
and hence no protection will be granted.
IV. Pillar 3: Procedure for protected disclosures (Q6-12)
Pillar 3 addresses issues of an organisational culture to build confidence in reporting;
monitoring of established reporting channels; gender-sensitive and inclusive reporting
channels; reporting to law enforcement or relevant authorities; and measures to
safeguard confidentiality and the handling of anonymous reports when such reporting
is possible.
These principles are aligned with CoSP resolution 10/8, in particular par. 3, which
encourages governments to establish and strengthen confidential complaint systems
and protected internal reporting systems that are accessible, diversified and inclusive,
and par. 12, which calls on governments to establish, facilitate and maintain complaint
intake systems that allow reporting persons in their professional context or workplace
environment to report directly to law enforcement or other relevant authorities without
having to exhaust internal reporting first.
The OECD Anti-Bribery Recommendation complements this framework: Section XXI
encourages countries to provide easily accessible and diverse reporting channels and
to raise awareness of them, while Section XXII emphasises the importance of allowing
anonymous reports, ensuring full protection if a whistleblower’s identity is revealed,
and prohibiting organisations from using contractual clauses, such as confidentiality
agreements, NDAs, or settlement terms, to limit or override the legal rights and
protections of whistleblowers.
Paragraph 14 of resolution 10/8 further encourages States Parties, in accordance with
domestic legislation, to ensure that individual legal or contractual obligations, such as
confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements, cannot be used to conceal corrupt acts
from scrutiny in order to deny protection or penalise reporting persons for having
reported information on corruption-related offences to the competent authorities.
Principle 9 of the OECD Recommendation on Public Integrity further emphasises the
need for an open organisational culture that is responsive to integrity concerns. It calls
16

--- Page 18 ---
for enabling individuals to report ethical dilemmas, integrity issues, or errors freely,
with leadership providing timely guidance and resolution. It also requires countries to
offer alternative channels for reporting suspected integrity violations, including
confidential reporting to a body capable of conducting an independent investigation.
Paragraph 13 of resolution 10/8 encourages States Parties to initiate, develop or
improve specific training programmes for their personnel responsible for protecting
reporting persons, in line with article 33 of UNCAC, to effectively protect those persons
against any unjustified treatment as a result of reporting.
A. Organisational Culture
Country responses show considerable variation in how “organisational culture” is
understood, ranging from awareness-raising and publishing guidelines to creating safe
environments where individuals feel free to speak up. Across countries, efforts to build
such a culture combine legal requirements, training, and accessible reporting systems.
Whistleblowing is promoted as a right tied to free speech, accountability, and
workplace safety, with laws requiring clear guidance on reporting, often made visible
online or in workplaces. Authorities and organisations have established accessible
channels, clarified confidentiality and follow-up procedures, and provided support,
while training and awareness campaigns help people speak up. These measures are
complemented by governance frameworks, compliance programmes, and oversight
mechanisms to guarantee confidentiality, timely follow-up, and proper handling of
reports. In both the public and private sectors, practical tools such as model policies,
surveys, awards, and peer-learning networks reinforce integrity and safe
environments.
In Saudi Arabia, the Oversight and Anti-Corruption Authority (Nazaha), is the main
body responsible for receiving reports. The multiplicity of channels for receiving reports
guarantees the confidentiality of reports and the protection of personal data for the
reporter in a manner that prevents identification, and protection from any harm that
may come upon them. In addition, Nazaha’s reporting system does not allow the
individual receiving the report to view their data, and this is only done within certain
limits and according to written procedures, as Nazaha has the right to take all
necessary measures to provide protection for those who report or provide information
about corruption, administrative and financial violations. Moreover, Nazaha actively
promotes public awareness about the importance of combating corruption and
reporting wrongdoing, encouraging citizens to partner in this fight through various
communication channels. Furthermore, specialised programs for employees
responsible for preventing and combating corruption are adopted, which include law
enforcement officers, public prosecutors and judges. Training programs have also
been held to qualify specialists in reporting and protecting whistleblowers. These
programs create a foundation for the mechanisms of receiving and handling reports.
In China, organisational culture is understood as protections enshrined in the
Constitution and criminal law, with citizens allowed to criticise, suggest, accuse, and
report without fear of retaliation, and state organs required to protect them. Brazil has
integrity units in public bodies to monitor integrity and anti-corruption programmes,
provide training, and build trust in reporting. Norway has introduced legal requirements
to promote a climate of free expression within organisations.
17

--- Page 19 ---
Italy is strongly committed to fostering an organisational culture supportive of
whistleblowers, primarily through a comprehensive training program developed by the
National School of Administration (SNA). Both general and specialised courses are
offered to explain whistleblowing mechanisms and to address cultural and social
resistances that often discourage reporting.
In addition, in 2025 a quantitative survey involving around 6000 respondents (the
research: “Training for Change: Open Administration and Innovative Training Models
for the Effective Implementation of Whistleblowing as a Tool for the Identification,
Prevention, and Management of Maladministration”) was published, to assess civil
servants’ perceptions of whistleblowing, to evaluate the impact of training activities on
reducing negative attitudes.
Box 4. Norway: Explicit requirement in legislation for a satisfactory climate
Norway
The Working Environment Act now explicitly encompasses the objective of fostering a
satisfactory climate for free expression within the undertaking. The rationale for this
amendment was that the expression climate in a workplace may be decisive for
whether a report is submitted, as well as for how such reports are handled.
In connection with the introduction of the new whistleblowing regulations in the
Working Environment Act, the Norwegian Labour Inspection Authority conducted
several information campaigns about the whistleblowing regulations.
B. Monitoring of internal reporting channels
Almost half of the country responses indicated that their frameworks include the active
monitoring of the functioning of internal reporting channels, relying on a mix of
oversight bodies, legal obligations, inspections, and sanctions to ensure effectiveness.
Australia uses independent oversight in regard to the public sector through the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security.
France and Italy report that their anti-corruption agencies review reporting frameworks
and report deficiencies. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia encourages, and in specific
regulated sectors, requires the establishment of internal reporting channels.
Monitoring is performed through multiple mechanisms, primarily led by the Oversight
and Anti-Corruption Authority (NAZAHA), which serves as the primary anti-corruption
agency. NAZAHA encourages and monitors the implementation of ethical frameworks
in government entities and, while it does not directly monitor every private sector
channel, its role in combating corruption drives broader adoption and provides an
external avenue for reporting if internal channels are deficient. Additionally, in the
public sector, Article 20 of the Code of Professional Conduct and Public Service Ethics
stipulates that employers must report any instances of corruption they encounter
during their employment. Furthermore, the Executive Regulations for Human
Resources in the Civil Service mandate that government entities announce the Code
of Professional Conduct and Public Service Ethics to their employees and disseminate
awareness of it through various means, emphasising that violation of the Code
constitutes a violation of job duties.
18

--- Page 20 ---
Japan and the Republic of Korea conduct surveys or annual inspections to assess the
effectiveness of internal channels and recommend improvements. Norway requires
organisations with at least five employees to have whistleblowing routines, overseen
by the Labour Inspection Authority. In Spain, human resources or inspection
departments are tasked with reviewing reporting protocols every three years. Other
countries impose fines for failing to establish internal channels, mandate their
introduction for organisations above a certain size, or encourage adoption without
formal monitoring. Several more country examples are provided in Box 5.
Box 5. Monitoring internal reporting channels in Australia, India and the
Republic of Korea
Australia
In regard to the private sector, the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Inspector-
General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) oversee implementation of the Public
Interest Disclosure Act. Agencies must notify them of disclosure allocations, referrals,
decisions not to investigate, and provide them with a final report of an investigation.
Intelligence agencies must notify the IGIS within 1 day for urgent disclosures and
otherwise within 14 days and give regular progress updates. Oversight functions
include investigating complaints, reviewing agency compliance, and making
recommendations on handling disclosures. The Ombudsman also sets procedural
standards and issues six-monthly and annual reports covering disclosures received,
types of conduct reported, investigations undertaken and their timeliness, and related
complaints.
India
Under the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Informers (PIDPI) Resolution
(2004), India mandates the establishment and oversight of internal reporting
mechanisms across all Ministries, Departments, and Central Public Sector
Undertakings (CPSUs). The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) supervises
complaints received by designated authorities, with Chief Vigilance Officers (CVOs)
required to manage disclosures, ensure confidentiality, and submit periodic reports.
In the private sector, Section 177(9)– (10) of the Companies Act, 2013, and Regulation
22 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Listing Obligations and
Disclosure Requirements (LODR), 2015, require listed and specified public companies
to establish vigil mechanisms. SEBI monitors compliance through inspections and
mandates disclosure of whistleblower policies in governance reports and on company
websites.
Republic of Korea
Internal reporting channels are annually monitored to verify how whistleblower reports
are handled. Inspection includes whether institutions implemented their own managing
system to protect whistleblowers, established a one-stop-shop for accepting public
interest reports, designated an officer (also known as a responsible person in some
jurisdictions) in charge of receiving and acting on reports, whether a financial reward
19

