--- Page 1 ---
1
Strategic Pillars of the
National Anti-
Corruption Strategy
(NACS: 2020-2030)
Presentation Date: 09 November 2023
Occasion: National Dialogue on Anti-Corruption

--- Page 2 ---
2
Purpose
To present the content of the National Anti-Corruption
Strategy (2020-2030), with a special emphasis on its 6
strategic pillars.
2

--- Page 3 ---
3
Content of the Strategy
• Vision
• Values
• Strategic Objectives
• Pillars and Proposed Programmes
• Stakeholders and Role-players
• Roles and Responsibilities
• Institutional Arrangements for Implementation
• Timeframes for Implementation
• Review and reporting
3

--- Page 4 ---
4
NACS Vision
(page 24)
4

--- Page 5 ---
5
NACS Values
(page 25)
The following guiding values, are the cornerstone of this Strategy:
• Adherence to Constitutional Values
• Integrity
• Accountability and responsibility
• Transparency and access to
information
• Collaboration.
5

--- Page 6 ---
6
NACS Strategic Objectives
(pages 26-27)
1. Citizen Participation
2. Ethical Leadership
3. Professional and skilled employees
4. Transparent and accountable governance systems
5. A culture of reporting and whistleblowing
6. Protection of sectors most vulnerable to corruption
7. Strengthening of anti-corruption agencies
6

--- Page 7 ---
7
NACS Strategic Pillars
(pages 29-41)
1. Promote and encourage active citizenry, whistleblowing, integrity
and transparency in all spheres of society
2. Advance the professionalisation of employees to optimise their
contribution to create corruption-free workplaces
3. Enhance governance, oversight and consequence management in
organisations
4. Improve the integrity and credibility of the public procurement system
5. Strengthen the resourcing, coordination, performance, accountability
and independence of dedicated anti-corruption agencies
6. Protect vulnerable sectors that are most prone to corruption and
unethical practices with effective risk management
7

--- Page 8 ---
8
NACS Strategic Pillars and Programmes
(pages 29-41)
• Description of focus
• Anticipated impact
• Key envisioned outcomes for the pillar
• Implementation programmes
• Detail on these programmes are in the draft Implementation
plan - an extract is appended to the Strategy as Appendix G.
• The Implementation Monitoring Framework consolidates the
high-level Outputs that should be achieved through these
programmes
• NACAC is currently refining the NACS Implementation Plan 8
and M&E Framework. Advisory note in place.

--- Page 9 ---
9
Pillars and Programmes
of the
National Anti-Corruption Strategy
As reflected in NACS Implementation Monitoring Framework
March 2021

--- Page 10 ---
10
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
(pages 30-31)
PROGRAMME 1.A. (Outputs)
Support active citizenry and promote values reorientation initiatives to prevent
and combat corruption.
1.A.1 Anti-corruption strategy launched via a broad-based multi-sectoral event
1.A.2 National communication plan developed to encourage values re-orientation in society
1.A.3 Programmes developed to promote enhanced understanding of citizens’ rights and
government processes
1.A.4 Education campaigns implemented at all schools
1.A.5 Annual anti-corruption summit(s) hosted
1.A.6 National programme of government-supported public dialogues (involving focused
engagements with civil society, communities (urban and rural), government, professional
bodies, business, traditional leadership etc.) aimed at identifying and addressing the root
causes and effects of corruption.
10

--- Page 11 ---
11
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
(pages 30-31)
PROGRAMME 1.B. (Outputs)
Protect and support whistle-blowers and resource the whistleblowing mechanisms
1.B.1 Research report with recommendations completed into strengthening whistleblower
mechanisms, including feasibility of a centralised whistle-blower agency
1.B.2 Recommendations of whistleblower report implemented
1.B.3 Organisational policies and procedures to support whistle-blowers strengthened and
training provided for HR officials.
11

--- Page 12 ---
12
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
(pages 30-31)
PROGRAMME 1.C. (Outputs)
Improve integrity management and encourage a commitment to ethical behaviour
1.C.1 Ethics and integrity courses included in all higher education programmes
1.C.2 Companies/organisations commit to fair business practices though Corporate Integrity
Pledges
1.C.3 Enabling environment for the media in the fight against corruption ensured
1.C.4 Overarching engagement plan to facilitate and support:
- Sector stakeholder engagements forums
- Ethics and Integrity Management infrastructure/committees (public and private sector)
- Communities of Practice (e.g. learning networks); and
- Professional support forums
12

--- Page 13 ---
13
Pillar 1 - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
(pages 30-31)
PROGRAMME 1.D. (Outputs)
Increase and strengthen transparency in all sectors
1.D.1 Review of PAIA undertaken to ensure compliance with the African Model Law on Access
to Information
1.D.2 Oversight mechanisms in place to improve government compliance with PAIA and to
promote pro-active disclosure
1.D.3 Government administrative systems (including record-keeping and archiving) reformed,
digitised and data integrity management improved to:
- reinforce and support oversight functions (i.e. Public Audit Act, PAIA, PAJA & POPI);
and
- improve availability and quality of data on corruption matters.
1.D.4 Mechanisms to provide information on “Beneficial Ownership” established
1.D.5 Compliance by private sector on reporting of corruption improved
1.D.6 Transparency in political party funding improved through effective implementation of
Political Party Funding Act (Act 6 of 2018)
1.D.7 Transparency in governance improved through professional guidelines, information
13
campaigns and communication on successes (e.g. arrests / convictions) and the
consequences of corruption

--- Page 14 ---
14
Pillar 2 - PROFESSIONALISATION
(pages 32-33)
PROGRAMME 2.A. (Outputs)
Support professionalisation of the public sector by giving effect to Chapter 13
of the National Development Plan.
2.A.1 Appointment processes reformed for public servants and local government
administrators by giving effect to Chapter 13 of the National Development Plan to
professionalise the public service.
2.A.2 Competency assessments designed and implemented for senior public officials and
SOE boards that give effects to reformed recruitment processes as per the NDP, and
which support effective evaluation of technical / subject matter expertise.
2.A.3 A graduate recruitment scheme with some common /shared training and development
experience implemented for key professions and senior managers in the public sector.
14

--- Page 15 ---
15
Pillar 2 - PROFESSIONALISATION
(pages 32-33)
PROGRAMME 2.B. (Outputs)
Enhance the capacity and integrity of the professions central to anti-corruption
efforts
2.B.1 Specialised training and development for the professions central to anti-corruption
2.B.2 Strong ethics curricula included in all tertiary qualifications for the professions central
to AC work, and/or courses offered by professional associations
2.B.3 Professional associations reinvigorate ethical standards of their respective
professions.
15

--- Page 16 ---
16
Pillar 3 – GOOD GOVERNANCE
(pages 34-35)
PROGRAMME 3.A. (Outputs)
Enhance ethical leadership across sectors
3.A.1 Director development programmes expanded to enhance good governance and build
the ethics competency of board members in private sector and SOEs
3.A.2 Ethics frameworks for elected representatives strengthened
Initiatives in this regard could include:
- Reviewing the Executive Members Ethics Act (No 82. of 1998) and other relevant
codes;
- Ethics training and dialogues; and
- Supporting existing initiatives such as the development of the Code for Ethical
Governance in Local Government.
3.A.3 Annual awards that recognises ethical leadership and integrity initiatives.
These awards could be hosted by civil society organisations working to promote public
ethics and accountability.
3.A.4 Mechanisms developed to enhance accountability and compliance by Accounting
Officers, Accounting Authorities and Senior Managers in the Public Sector.
16

--- Page 17 ---
17
Pillar 3 – GOOD GOVERNANCE
(pages 34-35)
PROGRAMME 3.B. (Outputs)
Strengthen oversight and governance capacity in the public sector
3.B.1 Assessment conducted to determine how Constitutional and other oversight bodies
can be strengthened (e.g. AGSA, Public Protector, IPID etc.) and recommendations
implemented
3.B.2 Local Government Anti-Corruption Strategy and relevant provincial strategies
implemented
3.B.3 Capacity and performance of municipal oversight functions in the local government
sphere improved
17

--- Page 18 ---
18
Pillar 3 – GOOD GOVERNANCE
(pages 34-35)
PROGRAMME 3.C. (Outputs)
Strengthen ethics and integrity promotion across sectors
Improve measures and systems to manage integrity and employee behaviour, and to proactively detect deviant
behaviour
3.C.1 Resource the DPSA Public Administration Ethics, Integrity, and Disciplinary Technical Assistance
Unit and ensure corresponding resourcing and implementation of PAMAwithin departments.
3.C.2 Requirements of the Public Service Regulations and other legislation regulating ethics, the conduct
of employees of the state and public representatives implemented.
3.C.3 Database developed and administered by the DPSA of all public sector officials found guilty of fraud,
corruption or other white-collar crimes. At local government level, CoGTA should maintain a similar
database. These databases must be consulted before appointments are made.
3.C.4 Integrity testing and lifestyle audits framework finalised and processes implemented (starting with for
senior officials involved in tender processes, supply-chain management officials, members of boards
of SOEs)
3.C.5 Training and capacity-building programmes in the public sector enhanced to:
a) promote an enhanced understanding of key legislation relevant to anti-corruption and
b) foster a values-based organisational culture and workplace
3.C.6 Holistic employee wellness programmes provided in the public sector to limit deviant behavior or
susceptibility to corruption, caused by financial distress. 18
3.C.7 Implementation of integrity promotion measures included as indicator in the performance
management contracts of senior managers in all sectors

--- Page 19 ---
19
Pillar 3 – GOOD GOVERNANCE
(pages 34-35)
PROGRAMME 3.D. (Outputs)
Strengthen accountability and programme management in organisations across
sectors
3.D.1 Research project focused on the development of anti-corruption architecture and
investigative capacity in the public sector.
(This should include recommendations on developing the capacity for integrity testing
and life-style audits)
3.D.2 Enhance and publicise clear accountability frameworks for professional associations
for transgressing professional codes.
3.D.3 Anti-corruption compliance culture developed in private companies and state-owned
entities to proactively prevent and manage the risk of corruption
19

--- Page 20 ---
20
Pillar 4 – PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
(pages 36-37)
PROGRAMME 4.A. (Outputs)
Enhance oversight and enforcement in public procurement
4.A.1 Regulatory and compliance mechanism established to ensure adherence to the relevant legislation,
policies and procedures regulating financial conduct and procurement across the entire public sector
(including the PFMA, MFMA and other procurement, and audit legislation).
4.A.2 Processes to restrict, debar, or blacklist individuals and businesses found to have transgressed
legislation relevant to procurement or financial accountability strengthened.
4.A.3 Feedback and monitoring system put in place to track progress with the implementation of remedial
actions recommended in forensic audit reports.
4.A.4 Formal referral and tracking mechanism established for procurement and financial misconduct cases
to be taken to law enforcement agencies
4.A.5 Research report on feasibility of incentivising reporting (whistleblowing) on illegal conduct in the
public procurement system
4.A.6 Measures to improve ethical behaviour by business strengthened in particular business integrity in
large procurement contracts (e.g. the introduction of cross-sectoral integrity pacts; and strengthening
cooperation to cancel contracts and recover costs after convictions)
20

--- Page 21 ---
21
Pillar 4 – PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
(pages 36-37)
PROGRAMME 4.B. (Outputs)
Improve transparency and data management in public procurement
4.B.1 Integrated, digital financial and procurement management system incorporating the
principles of open governance and open contracting established
4.B.2 Public education tools developed to support accountability in public procurement
PROGRAMME 4.C. (Outputs)
Support professionalism in Supply Chain Management
4.C.1 Professionalisation of occupations within the SCM value chain in state organisations
and public entities enhanced
4.C.2 Compulsory training programme for senior management and accounting officers on
SCM developed
21

--- Page 22 ---
22
Pillar 5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION AGENCIES
(pages 38-39)
PROGRAMME 5.A. (Outputs)
Strengthen South Africa’s relationships with other countries in the fight against
corruption
5.A.1 Bilateral cooperation between South Africa and other countries improved for
specialised investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings with emphasis on
economic, cyber and financial crimes
5.A.2 Improve relations in respect to extradition and mutual legal assistance (including
negotiation of agreements and strengthening of implementation mechanisms)
22

--- Page 23 ---
23
Pillar 5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION AGENCIES
(pages 38-39)
PROGRAMME 5.B. (Outputs)
Establish an anti-corruption coordinating body to coordinate all anti-corruption
activities
5.B.1Full-time secretariat appointed to support National
Anti-Corruption Advisory Council (NACAC)
5.B.2National Anti-Corruption Advisory Council
(NACAC), established, comprising representatives
from all sectors of society
5.B.3Performance and functioning of the current AC
mechanisms and functions reviewed and
strengthened
5.B.4Overarching body established to coordinate all
anti-corruption activities
23

--- Page 24 ---
24
Pillar 5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION AGENCIES
(pages 38-39)
PROGRAMME 5.C. (Outputs)
Resource anti-corruption agencies by undertaking capacitation, training and
modernisation of methodology and human resource for improved law enforcement
5.C.1 Systems for capturing and analysing relevant intelligence information and data on
reported or suspected cases of corruption improved
5.C.2 Use of intelligence products and advisories in corruption matters improved
5.C.3 Advanced skills development programmes for investigators and prosecutors
implemented (Also see Output 2.B.1)
5.C.4 Specialised training, with supportive mentoring and coaching programmes, provided
to investigators in the field of sophisticated economic and financial crime as well as
cybercrime (Also see Output 2.B.1)
24

--- Page 25 ---
25
Pillar 5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION AGENCIES
(pages 38-39)
PROGRAMME 5.D. (Outputs)
Safeguard the independence of key anti-corruption agencies responsible for
investigating and prosecuting corruption
5.D.1 Effective oversight of anti-corruption agencies through direct performance reporting to
the relevant clusters, Parliament and through public scrutiny undertaken by civil society
and members of the public.
5.D.2 Anti-corruption agencies receive adequate budgets
25

--- Page 26 ---
26
Pillar 6 – VULNERABLE SECTORS
(pages 40-41)
PROGRAMME 6.A. (Outputs)
Conduct research into public and private sectors vulnerable to corruption
6.A.1 Risk management framework developed to guide the assessment of vulnerable sectors
6.A.2 Key industries, sectors and government departments at all three tiers and state-owned
entities that are most vulnerable to corruption/exploitation identified
6.A.3 Comprehensive research undertaken into each of the identified areas regarded as most
vulnerable to corruption, with recommendations to address risks
PROGRAMME 6.B. (Outputs)
Implement interventions aimed at: reducing the risk of corruption and promoting
integrity management in vulnerable sectors
6.B.1 Review of existing strategies, projects and/or programmes of action in terms of their
effectiveness in mitigating risks identified within the targeted sectors
6.B.2 Promote collaboration between key stakeholders to fight corruption in sectors
vulnerable to corruption
6.B.3 Anti-corruption strategies developed and implemented in each prioritised sector,
26
government department and/or state-owned entity.

--- Page 27 ---
27
Pillar 6 – VULNERABLE SECTORS
(pages 40-41)
PROGRAMME 6.C. (Outputs)
Conduct monitoring, evaluation and a review of interventions aimed at risk
management in vulnerable sectors
6.C.1 Measurable plans developed for interventions for each identified vulnerable entity /
sector
6.C.2 Monitoring and evaluation implemented to assess progress and impact of
interventions in vulnerable sectors
6.C.3 Process for regular review of priorities and interventions established and
recommendations from these evaluations implemented
27

--- Page 28 ---
28
The Mandate of NACAC
1. Advise on the effective implementation of the Strategy by government, civil society and the
private sector;
2. Advise key role-players on the overarching thrust of the Strategy, namely the six pillars
upon which it is premised;
3. Advise on strengthening of South Africa’s anti-corruption architecture;
4. Host the national anti-corruption summit(s), bringing together government, civil society,
business, and academia, to set the country’s anti-corruption agenda and evaluate
progress in the implementation of the Strategy.
5. Advise on the implementation of the recommendations of ‘The Judicial Commission of
Enquiry into Allegations of State Capture, Corruption and Fraud in the Public Sector,
including Organs of State’ (The Zondo Commission) from a strategic and systemic
perspective 28

--- Page 29 ---
29
NACAC priorities and workstreams
1. NACS monitoring, evaluation, research and learning
2. Whistleblower protection
3. Anti-corruption in procurement
4. Anti-corruption institutional architecture
5. Legislation and transparency
6. Communication
29

--- Page 30 ---
30
THANK YOU

