--- Page 1 ---
A Formula for Integrity:
Institutional Leadership with External Accountability
Keynote address by Professor Christopher Stone
The National Dialogue of the National Anti-Corruption Advisory Council of South Africa
8th November 2023
Honorable Chief Justice
Honorable Ministers
Most excellent Ambassadors
Council Chair and distinguished Councilors,
And dedicated participants in this National Dialogue
I am honored by the invitation to address you today.
I have been asked to share with you some international experiences regarding anti-corruption
strategies and their implications for your work here in South Africa. I am happy to do so,
though the story itself is not a happy one, as international experience has not, for the most
part, been good.
Most countries have signed up to the UN Convention Against Corruption and have developed
national strategies to eradicate corruption, yet corruption continues to thrive almost
everywhere. We saw that yesterday, with the police raids across Portugal and the resignation
of its prime minister. In my hometown of New York City, the FBI has been investigating the
campaign fundraising of the current mayor, causing the head of one anti-corruption NGO to
worry that the city is again for sale and that “New York has gone back to the bad old days
where pay to play and bribery were just part of political life.”1
It’s not just New York. Your national anti-corruption strategy notes that South Africa has
ratified
• the United Nations Convention against Corruption
• the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery
• the African Union’s Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption, and
• SADC’s Protocol Against Corruption.
And yet most of the countries that have done the same have seen no improvement in the
perception of corruption in their countries. Twelve years ago, Transparency International
unveiled its new and improved corruption perception index to help us measure progress, but
1 Emma G. Fitzsimmons and Michael Rothfeld, “Did Fake Donors Give the Mayor Real Money? The FBI wants to
know” in New York Times, 4 November 2023, available at https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/04/nyregion/eric-
adams-straw-donor-scheme.html.

--- Page 2 ---
what it’s measured instead is stagnation. In the latest report, more than 85% of countries were
still right where they started on the Index a dozen years earlier.
In short, what the fight against corruption requires today, what the world requires, is
innovation. Fortunately, here in South Africa, with your widely admired constitution, you are
one of the world’s great innovators in the architecture of governance.
What international experience can do is alert you to the traps into which others have fallen.
One of the strategic mistakes made in many countries has been underestimating the systemic
nature of the problem. These countries usually design their anti-corruption institutions to do
two things: the hard work of law enforcement (investigation, prosecution, adjudication), and
the work of prevention—often imagined to be “soft” (public education, civil service training).
But it rarely works. Why? Because it’s based on a false picture of corruption. It mistakenly
imagines that corruption results from a few corrupt people having worked their ways into
positions of power and then acted corruptly. This is a picture of corruption as a virus: a foreign
disease that has infected us. And this picture leads to a predictable strategy: kill the virus and
then focus on prevention. Prosecute the corrupt people who have slipped inside and then do
everything you can to keep other corrupt people out through background checks and other
devices when you’re recruiting.
But that is not where corruption comes from.
Corruption is in the system. It doesn’t enter with a bad person, it is in the nature of big power
and big money to which people in government have daily access. Power corrupts, as Lord
Acton famously said. Good people find themselves inside these institutions with lots of power
and money, and they start going along with corrupt schemes in which they never imagined they
would be complicit.
So, the work against corruption is not like fighting a virus; it is about building systems of
integrity and institutional cultures of integrity that keep people on mission, working in the
public interest, and not using the power and money at their disposal for private gain.
This is constant work for the leadership of every public institution, and there’s nothing soft
about it. Call it prevention if you must, but don’t imagine it is easy or just a side show. If anti-
corruption efforts are to include training, the training that’s most needed is not public
education about bribery, but training for the leaders of public institutions in system leadership
and culture change.
Law enforcement is crucial. I’ve spent most of my career helping to strengthen the institutions
of the justice sector in many countries. Investigating and prosecuting corruption, especially
grand corruption and state capture is difficult yet essential work. And the experience of other

--- Page 3 ---
countries makes clear that the investigators and prosecutors must be well equipped, well
trained, and effectively independent.
Yet equipping and training investigators and prosecutors, especially to tackle cases of grand
corruption, is becoming harder worldwide. There was once hope that the digital revolution
would make criminal investigations and adjudication more efficient—as it has with so much
that we do—but the opposite has happened. As so much of our lives are now lived in the
digital realm, criminal investigations must now sort through unimaginable quantities of digital
evidence. The sheer volume and technical complexity of digital evidence has resulted in fewer
police investigations leading to prosecutions, not more, worldwide.
Even the wealthiest countries struggle to keep their police and prosecutors equipped and
trained with the latest digital forensic tools, but most countries are not even close to equipping
their law enforcement agencies with the tools needed to collect, analyse, and use digital
evidence effectively. In conversations with the heads of digital forensic units in Europe and
North America, I’ve asked if they work with peer institutions here on the African continent. The
answer has always been no, they do not know of a single world-class digital forensic unit in
Africa, but they look forward to the day when they will have a peer on the continent, and my
personal expectation is that South Africa will lead the continent in this new forensic capability.
But even the best investigators and prosecutors won’t stop corruption on their own. We
cannot just prosecute our way out of corruption. The work of law enforcement must be aligned
with the work of the leaders in each department, ministry, municipality, and state-owned
enterprise, the leaders building systems and cultures of integrity in their institutions. Success
against corruption comes from this partnership between external accountability and internal
leadership working constantly on integrity. That means the work must proceed department by
department, ministry by ministry.
At Oxford University’s School of Government, I teach a course on public corruption turnarounds
in which we dig down into the real work of building institutional systems of integrity and
leading culture change. Let me share just two stories drawn from that course to illustrate just
what this kind anti-corruption work looks like.
The first story comes from the United States and is about turning around one of the most
notoriously corrupt police agencies in the country. At the end of the last century, the police
department of New Orleans, Louisiana, was thoroughly corrupt, with police officers on the
payroll of organised crime, even carrying out killings on behalf of the criminals, politicians using
the police to pursue personal vendettas, and worse. The tolerance of this corruption finally
broke when a police officer shot and killed another police officer under orders from a criminal
gang, and the cop he killed turned out to be his former patrol partner.
The young reform mayor hired a new police chief from Washington, DC, and that new chief
crafted a plan to turn around the department. He knew that probably 80-90% of the police
officers had participated in the corruption one way or another, but he guessed that the

--- Page 4 ---
organisers, the ring leaders, were no more than 10 or 15%. He asked the FBI to help him
remove those ring leaders, and they did so, investigating and arresting many of them. At the
same time, he dug into the department to find those 10-20% who had kept clear of the
corruption, and he looked for opportunities to promote them into senior roles. He knew that
this was one of his most potent tools for culture change: promotions from within the
institution.
As an aside, I note that Chief Justice Zondo in his reports on state capture, does a great service
by describing not only the acts of corruption his Commission uncovered, but also the people
who resisted corruption and maintained their integrity, people like Themba Maseko, the CEO of
the Government Communication and Information Service in 2010. As Justice Zondo wrote, if
there had been more public servants like him, the project of state capture could have been
stopped in its earliest days. Well, there are people like Maseko in every department, no matter
how corrupt. The leader’s job is to find them, and promote them. And that’s what happened in
New Orleans.
The police chief took other steps as well, increasing partnerships and exchanges with other
departments nationally, expanding transparency with the public, and more. The strategy
worked, and within 2 or 3 years, the department was widely praised for its newfound
professionalism and effectiveness.
Unfortunately, what the mayor and police chief refused to do was open the department to
routine outside inspection and oversight. They saw themselves as the guarantors of the
department’s integrity, and did not trust an outside body to do so. The result was that when
the mayor reached his term limit and the police chief lost the next election for mayor, they
both left town and the reforms they had introduced fell away. Within a few years, the New
Orleans police were again deeply corrupt.
There are lots of lessons here, but the main point is that prosecuting the corrupt officers was a
crucial part, but only a part of the turnaround. The key was leadership and a plan to build
integrity. The flaw was that, once FBI was done, the leadership did not understand the value,
indeed the need, for continued outside oversight to maintain the reforms.
The second story is happening today in Brazil. Like South Africa, Brazil lived through a massive
corruption scandal from 2014 to 2019, with prosecutors revealing massive corruption in the
state-owned oil company and its connection with the huge bribes being paid to dozens of
politicians by one of the largest construction companies in the Americas. But when that
sensational case was over, and Lula returned to the Presidency, the question was how the
government could maintain the drive against corruption across the Federal government.
This task fell in large part to the Secretary of Public Integrity within the Office of the
Comptroller General. She has authority to set standards for integrity across the executive
branch of the federal government of Brazil, and so her office requires every federal ministry
and department to maintain an ombuds office and a disciplinary board, to conduct internal

--- Page 5 ---
audits and annual integrity risk assessments, and to set annual goals for improvements. Her
office also collects data on all of these processes in each department.
Earlier this year, the heads of two different departments with big corruption risks came to her
and asked for help. One was a state-owned enterprise for regional development, the other was
a department within the Ministry of Education responsible for dispersing federal funds to the
states. They were complying with all of her requirements, but they were having trouble acting
on the results. The systems were surfacing problems, but the leadership teams did not feel
able to solve those problems effectively on their own.
In response, the Secretary of Public Integrity launched a new programme in which her staff
provides mentorship and advice to leaders of a few high-risk departments on how to
strengthen their systems and build cultures of integrity.
In both New Orleans and Brazil prosecution of corrupt officials played crucial roles in the
stories, but the hard work of stopping corruption and building cultures of integrity required
daily work by the leaders of individual public institutions.
In both New Orleans and Brazil, we can see the value of partnerships between institutional
leadership and external accountability. On its own, external accountability can maintain
pressure for reform, but it can’t make the needed reforms from the outside. On their own,
institutional reformers can reduce corruption in the short-term, but it can rebound as soon as
the reformer is gone. Together, however, internal leadership with external accountability can
build cultures of integrity that last.
So let’s be clear about the implications of this for your work here in South Africa, and here at
this National Dialogue. You are designing the architecture that should serve South Africa for
decades, hoping to prevent a return to the abuses of state capture, and, equally important, to
build cultures of integrity across the society and all of government. But what is the work that
these new structures will undertake?
The picture should not be one of a beautiful new institution protecting the country from
infection by corrupt actors.
Instead, the future of anti-corruption lies in the establishment of cultures of integrity,
department by department, ministry by ministry, SOE by SOE. And that work is best
undertaken through partnerships between institutional leaders and outside institutions of
accountability.
What is the institutional architecture that can train and support those institutional leaders?
What is the institutional architecture that can allow law enforcement to play its essential role?
Those are the questions on which the world is eager to learn from you.

