--- Page 1 ---
NOVEMBER 2023
Victims of Corruption
Back for Payback
Felipe Freitas Falconi Juanita Olaya Garcia
José Ugaz Yara Esquivel Soto

--- Page 3 ---
Victims of Corruption
Back for Payback
Felipe Freitas Falconi
José Ugaz
Juanita Olaya Garcia
Yara Esquivel Soto

--- Page 4 ---
© 2023 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: star.worldbank.org
Email: starinitiative@worldbank.org
Twitter: @returningassets
Some rights reserved.
StAR—the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative—is a partnership between the World Bank Group and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) that supports international efforts to
end safe havens for corrupt funds. StAR works with developing countries and financial centers to
prevent the laundering of the proceeds of corruption and to facilitate more systematic and timely
return of stolen assets.
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime with external contributions. The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this
work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or
the governments they represent, the United Nations, or its Member States. The World Bank and
the United Nations do not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundar-
ies, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank or the United Nations concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges
and immunities of The World Bank or the United Nations, all of which are specifically reserved.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissem-
ination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial
purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Cover illustration by Lindsay Jordan Kretchen
Design by Sensical Design

--- Page 5 ---
Contents
Abbreviations 4
Acknowledgments 5
Introduction 6
International Standards 12
2.1 The United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) 12
2.2 The Political Declaration adopted at the United Nations Special Session
of the General Assembly 14
2.3 The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption 15
2.4 The Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and
Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism 16
2.5 European Union (EU) Directive 2014/42/EU on the freezing and confiscation
of instrumentalities and proceeds of crime in the European Union 16
2.6 Victims as defined in International and Regional Human Rights Treaties and
Standards 16
2.7 Aarhus Convention 18
2.8 Other international commitments 18
Avenues for Reparation 20
3.1 Civil proceedings 20
3.2 Criminal proceedings 21
3.3 Class Actions and Representative Actions 23
3.4 Constitutional Protection Mechanisms 24
3.5 Human Rights Mechanisms 25
3.6 Administrative Procedures 27
3.7 Reparation funds 28
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 1

--- Page 6 ---
Legal Standing and Victim Status 30
4.1 Legal standing across jurisdictions 30
4.2 Legal standing in civil proceedings 32
4.3 Legal standing in criminal proceedings 32
4.4 Legal standing in class actions and representative actions 34
4.5 Types of victims 34
Establishing Damages 44
5.1 Direct and indirect damages 44
5.2 Material and immaterial damages 46
5.3 Proof and measurement of damages 47
Conclusion and Reflections for the Future 52
6.1 Enabling the participation of victims in criminal proceedings 52
6.2 Enabling the participation of victims in non-trial resolutions 53
6.3 Accounting for the nature of corruption damages 53
6.4 Enabling the recovery of damages through reparation funds 54
6.5 Measures beyond legislative and policy frameworks: Access to information,
research and participation of civil society, academia and victims of corruption 54
Table
Table 4.1. Cases in which Governments have Recovered Damages in U.S. Courts 37
2 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 7 ---
Boxes
Box 3.1. Consitution of Argentina 25
Box 3.2. Constitution of Costa Rica 25
Box 3.3. Enabling Collective Rights 28
Box 4.1. Civil Society and Asset Recovery 33
Box 4.2. The Gürtel case 34
Box 4.3. Switzerland 35
Box 4.4. United Kingdom 36
Box 4.5. United States 36
Box 4.6. Bribery Investigations Using the FCPA 37
Box 4.7. Costa Rica 39
Box 4.8. The Lava Jato Case 40
Box 4.9. Brazil 40
Box 5.1. Ricochet Damage 44
Box 5.2. Moral Damages 47
Box 5.3. Existence of Harm through Proof of Damages 48
Box 5.4. Moral Damages 48
Box 5.5. Non-Pecuniary Damages 49
Box 5.6. Quantification of Reparations 49
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 3

--- Page 8 ---
Abbreviations
CETS Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and
Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism
COPINH NGO Civic Council of Popular and Indigenous Organizations of Honduras
COSP Conference of State Parties to the UNCAC
ECCJ ECOWAS Court of Justice
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
EU European Union
FATF Financial Action Task Force
FCPA Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (United States)
GFAR Global Forum on Asset Recovery
IACHR Inter-American Commission of Human Rights
IBA International Bar Association
ICE Costa Rican Electricity Institute
MACCIH Mission to Support the Fight against Corruption and Impunity in Honduras
NGO Non-governmental Organization
OAS Organization of American States
OHCHR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
SFO Serious Fraud Office
StAR Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative
TI Transparency International
UN United Nations
UNCAC United Nations Convention against Corruption
UNECE United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
4 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 9 ---
Acknowledgments
The team benefitted from many perceptive comments from practitioners around the
world. The authors wish to extend their special thanks to the following practitioners and
colleagues who offered their review, experience, perspectives and national expertise
throughout the process: Frederic Raffray (World Bank consultant), Greysa Barrientos
(Chief Appellate Prosecutor, Costa Rica), Kate McMahon (Asset Recovery Committee
of the International Bar Association), Mary Butler (Chief of the International Unit of the
Money Laundering and Asset Recovery Section of the United States Department of
Justice), Melanie Chabert (Associate Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Officer,
UNODC), Miren Escos (World Bank Economist), Radha Ivory (Senior Lecturer in Law at
the University of Queensland, Australia), Robert Delonis (Manager of Special Litigations
Unit of the Integrity Vice Presidency at the World Bank).
The team also benefited from extensive contributions from Richard E. Messick
(World Bank Consultant) and the guidance and insightful comments from Mr. Emile Van
der Does de Villebois (StAR coordinator).
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 5

--- Page 10 ---
1 Introduction
Corruption harms communities and impacts the global economy. It discourages
business opportunities, hinders foreign aid and investment, and exacerbates inequality.
It victimizes society’s most vulnerable and marginalized individuals by affecting their
ability to meet their basic needs, as well as reducing their chances of overcoming
poverty and exclusion. For example, corruption costs lives in the construction industry1
and in the health care sector.2 The divesting of public funds leads to decreased spending
on public services, such as education and the protection of the environment.3 When
corruption is committed through criminal groups that are connected to influential
economic or political actors,4 it increases the risk of instability and violence, which in turn
poses a threat to international peace and security.
In recent years there has been an increasing recognition of the relationship between
corruption and human rights, as reflected by two resolutions adopted by the United
Nations (UN) Human Rights Council in 2021.5 Whereas social, economic and cultural
rights are affected when corruption impacts the provision and quality of goods and
services, civil and political rights are impacted when corruption prevents the proper
functioning of institutions, undermines the rule of law and ultimately harms trust in the
legitimacy of government.6
Despite this general understanding and the research efforts engaged in generating
data on this matter,7 because of its covert nature and pernicious consequences, the cost
of corruption is markedly difficult to measure and quantify. Similarly, victimization in this
context is often complex because, as in the case of environmental crime,8 its victims
are not always easily identifiable. In many cases, they may not even be aware of their
victimization.
The prevention and countering of corruption have attracted significant political
attention. However, it is also increasingly acknowledged that preventive approaches
and repressive criminal responses are incomplete if the damages arising from the acts
in question are left unaddressed. Thus, this publication is focused on exploring such
damages, including how victims can be compensated.
The reparation of damages exists as a general principle of law in all legal systems. In
both common law and civil law systems, it is understood as the remediation of a harm
originating from an unlawful conduct in order to reestablish the situation that would
have existed had the harm not occurred (Restitutio ad integrum).9 Different legal systems
resort to different terms to refer to the various concepts related to remedying damages.
Therefore, the terms recovery, restitution, reparation, compensation, remedy and redress
may have different meanings in different jurisdictions.
Moreover, the recovery of corruption damages may be grounded in two distinct con-
ceptual regimes: the “anti-corruption regime” on the one hand, and human rights law on
the other. Human rights are understood as “internationally guaranteed legal entitlements
of individuals vis-à-vis the state.”10 As such, they are the foundation for a claims-based
and victim-centered approach that is focused on ensuring reparation for the aggrieved
(individual or collective) victims. This contrasts with a repressive anti-corruption angle
that is focused on prosecuting the offenders and ensuring accountability. However, both
regimes have in common that they are grounded in the rule of law, or the idea that “all
persons and authorities within the state, whether public or private, should be bound by
and entitled to the benefit of laws publicly and prospectively promulgated and publicly
6 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 11 ---
administered in the courts.”11 In other words, both approaches require an application of
the law that is fair, consistent and predictable.
The United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), the only legally binding
universal anti-corruption instrument, incorporates provisions aimed at promoting
domestic legal frameworks that provide victims (and prior legitimate owners) with the
means to recover the damages and assets implicated in corruption offences. In this
context, the UNCAC’s Chapter V is devoted to asset recovery, which goes beyond the
archetypal and narrow anti-corruption focus on law enforcement with regard to the
offenders, specifically, to returning the stolen assets to their rightful owners, including
countries from which they had been illicitly taken. The inclusion of claims-based
provisions related to the compensation of victims within the UNCAC, if only sparsely
and broadly considered, shows that the anti-corruption regime and the human rights
approach do in fact interlock and mutually reinforce one another.
Notwithstanding, concepts such as that of the “victim,” when integrated into
anti-corruption treaties, do require a shift in perspective from the default objective of
ensuring accountability by averting impunity to the objective of ensuring the reparation
of the harms caused to victims–whether these are individuals, particular groups within
societies, or entire states.
Despite the international consensus reflected in regional and international instru-
ments and declarations (see chapter 2), no systematic research has been conducted
concerning the reparation of victims of corruption. Furthermore, the existing research
by academics,12 civil society
organizations,13 and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Despite the international (UNODC) shows that in only a
small number of countries have
consensus reflected in regional victims of corruption offences
been compensated. In most
cases in which embezzled funds
and international instruments
are recovered, no reparation is
received. Also, in most other cases,
and declarations, no systematic there is no information about the
matter. What is more, there do not
research has been conducted appear to be many such attempts
to recover the damages engen-
dered by acts of corruption.
concerning the reparation
This dearth of cases was
discussed by the UNCAC’s States
of victims of corruption. parties at the Sixth Session of the
Conference of State Parties to
the UNCAC (COSP) held in 2015.
It culminated in the adoption of a
resolution directing the COSP’s Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on Asset
Recovery to compile a list of best practices for identifying victims of corruption and the
parameters for compensation.14 Discussions continued at the 2017 and 2019 sessions.
The States parties also passed additional resolutions instructing the Working Group to
redouble its efforts to identify best practices.15
This publication was developed as part of that effort and within the larger objective
of stimulating further research and exchange on the matter. It is aimed at providing an
overview of the current state of law and practice regarding: (i) the recovery of corruption
damages; (ii) outlining the different types of legal frameworks and avenues available in
different legal systems; and (iii) the respective legal barriers and other challenges that
may arise.
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 7

--- Page 12 ---
INTRODUCTION
This publication draws on the responses of 56 jurisdictions received in response
to two questionnaires16 concerning countries’ legislation and their implementation. It
was conducted by the UNODC and the Asset Recovery Committee of the International
Bar Association. Despite the breadth of the geographic scope, the responses covering
every region, the stage of development and a diversity of legal systems, the sample was
considered too small to draw definitive conclusions from–especially as the responses
reflected the lack of available information concerning practical cases of implementation.
For this reason, references to the responses are limited to certain instances. The surveys
are referred to as “the questionnaires” throughout the publication. To the extent neces-
sary, the analysis also relies on existing research concerning the recovery of damages
for corruption and the comparative law literature on torts and civil liabilities and criminal
procedures,17 as well as the outcomes of the UNCAC’s country reviews conducted under
its Implementation Review Mechanism.
In terms of scope, the following points require attention. Firstly, although the most fre-
quently occurring type of corruption is small-scale corruption through which natural or
legal persons are harmed by agency actions or decisions, the scope of this publication
is focused on addressing questions of recovery relating to cases of grand corruption.
The significant sums involved in such cases, as well as their complexity, mean that the
possibility for recovery in such cases merits particular attention.
Moreover, this publication focuses on the existing legal avenues. Therefore, it does
not address the challenges associated with enforcing judgments once they are adju-
dicated. Judgment enforcement is a potentially significant challenge in transnational
corruption cases where the perpetrator or the stolen assets may reside outside of the
jurisdiction hosting the legal proceedings, so that the matter would merit a publication of
its own.18
Finally, the limitations of this study relate to the most salient feature of the countries
surveyed through the questionnaires, which is the absence of public information about
the participation of victims of corruption in criminal proceedings. The countries’ respons-
es to the questionnaires demonstrate the difficulty of accessing and sharing information
related to corruption cases. Of the 56 countries surveyed, only three (the Cayman
Islands, Greece and South Africa) indicated that they were aware of cases in which the
compensation of damages was granted to victims of corruption. Also, only three (Brazil,
South Africa and Switzerland) knew about the involvement of victims of corruption
in proceedings for asset return. In response to the question regarding whether the
government publishes statistics or reports about the role and participation of victims of
corruption in criminal proceedings, all surveyed countries responded negatively. There-
fore, the absence of relevant information for such cases is a limitation of its own.
Rather than aspiring to present a comprehensive overview or providing guidelines
on how countries could better repair the harm caused by corruption, this publication is
more humbly aimed at presenting the findings of the information available. The objective
is to serve as a starting point for further research, exchange and debate between policy
makers, legislators, prosecutors and other judicial officers, law enforcement officials,
legal scholars, human rights advocates, citizens, as well as the general public.
In addressing a globally diverse readership familiar with different legal systems, for
the purpose of this publication, the following expressions should be understood as
follows: Reparation is understood as a broad concept entailing any remedy with regard
to any type of harm caused by corruption, whether it be by restoring the situation to its
initial status or by compensating for the harm in any other way. Therefore, reparation
not only covers pecuniary damages, but also the wider, less tangible and more diffuse
damages. After all, the consequences of corruption do not limit themselves to direct
and immediate harms or easily quantifiable monetary losses. Furthermore, the pursuit
of monetary and non-monetary damages need not be a mutually exclusively endeavor.
Remedy is understood as an enforcement of the legal right of a person harmed by
a wrong, whereas compensation of damages is more narrowly understood as the
8 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 13 ---
monetary remedy imposed by a court and awarded to a harmed party as a recom-
pense for harm.
This publication contains 6 chapters, beginning with an overview of the international
and regional standards relating to the recovery of corruption damages (Chapter 2) and
the different existing judicial avenues for such reparation (Chapter 3). It moves on to
exploring legal standing and who can obtain victim status (Chapter 4), as well as damage
claims, including challenges in establishing causality (Chapter 5). Chapter 6 concludes
with potential actions aimed at overcoming the various challenges identified.
Notes
1 Nicholas Ambraseys and Roger Bilham, “Corruption Kills,” Nature, Issue 469, (2011): pp. 153–156.
2 Tim K. Mackey and others, “The Disease of Corruption: Views on How to Fight Corruption to
Advance 21st Century Global Health Goals,” BMC Medicine Issue 14, (2016): pp. 149–165. See also
K. Hussmann Health sector corruption. (Bergen: U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre, Chr. Michelsen
Institute, 2020), page 10.
3 Susan Rose-Ackerman and Bonnie J. Palifka, Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences,
and Reform, 2nd edition (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2016) pp. 27–36.
4 Sarah Chayes, “When Corruption is the Operating System: The case of Honduras.” (Washington, DC:
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2017), pages 1,112, and114.
5 Resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council no. A/HRC/RES/46/11 of 26 March 2021 concern-
ing the negative impact of the non-repatriation of funds of illicit origin to the countries of origin on the
enjoyment of human rights, and the importance of improving international cooperation and A/HRC/
RES/47/7 of 26 July 2021 on the negative impact of corruption on the enjoyment of human rights.
6 E. Hava, Gran corrupción: estrategias para evitar su impunidad internacional. Nuevo Foro Penal,
Volume 12, Issue 8, pages 60–98. doi:https://doi.org/10.17230/nfp.12.87.2.
7 The challenges of measuring the macroeconomic and microeconomic costs of corruption have
been outlined in an Evidence Paper prepared by the United Kingdom’s Department for International
Development. See page 35, Chapter 4 concerning the effects of corruption: costs and broader
impact of word missing? https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/406346/corruption-evidence-paper-why-corruption-matters.pdf.
See also a joint OECD-StAR publication concerning the Identification and Quantification of the
Proceeds of Bribery (worldbank.org).
8 See Eileen Skinnider, “Effect, Isssues and Challenges for Victims of Crimes that have a Significant
Impact on the Environment,” Book, publisher? (2013).
9 Clare Connellan, Elizabeth Oger-Gross and Angélica André, “Compensatory Damages Principles in
Civil and Common Law Jurisdictions: Requirements, Underlying Principles and Limits.” Trenor, John
(ed). In The Guide to Damages in International Arbitration (2018) p.7.
10 Kälin and Künzli, The Law of International Human Rights Protection, Oxford University Press, Second
Edition, p. 32.
11 Lord Bingham, The Rule of Law, Penguin UK, Reprint Edition 2011.
12 Michael Joachim Bonell and Olaf Meyer, “The Impact of Corruption on International Commercial
Contracts,” in M. Schauer and B. Verschraegen, eds., General Report of the XIXth Congress of
the International Academy of Comparative Law, Rapports Généraux du XIXème Congres de l’
Académie Internationale de Droit Compare (Springer Science + Business Media B.C. 2017); Olaf
Meyer, ed., The Civil Law Consequences of Corruption (Baden Baden, Nomos, 2009). UNCAC
Coalition. Submission by The UNCAC’s Coalition Victims of Corruption Working Group to the
first resumed 12th session of the Implementation Review Group. 27 August 2021. https://
uncaccoalition.org/recognizing-victims-of-corruption/. Juanita Olaya Garcia, “Arguments
or Excuses? Common Reasons I Hear to Avoid Reparations for Corruption Cases.” (Henry J.
Leir Institute, The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, 2020). https://www.
corruptionjusticeandlegitimacy.org/post/arguments-or-excuses-common-reasons-i-hear-to-
avoid-reparations-for-corruption-cases. Juanita Olaya García, “Reparations for Corruption: How
Corruption Enforcement Ignores Victims’ Rights.” (Henry J. Leir Institute, The Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy, Tufts University, 2020). https://www.corruptionjusticeandlegitimacy.org/post/
reparations-for-corruption-how-corruption-enforcement-ignores-victims-rights.
13 Transparency International, “Exporting Corruption: Progress Report 2020: Assessing Enforcement of
the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention.” (Berlin, Transparency International, 2020) pp. 21–24.
14 Resolution 6/2, Sixth Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, November 2015 (https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/corruption/
COSP/session6-resolutions.html).
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 9

--- Page 14 ---
INTRODUCTION
15 Resolution 8/9, Eight Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, December 2019 (https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/corruption/
COSP/session8-resolutions.html). Resolution 7/2, Seventh Session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption (https://www.unodc.org/documents/
treaties/UNCAC/COSP/session7/V1708295E.pdf).
16 Both the UNODC Note Verbale (Verbal Note) and the International Bar Association (IBA) question-
naire sought information about the domestic laws governing the recovery of damages for corruption,
including cases where there had been a successful recovery. Responses were received from 54
UNCAC state parties and the Cayman Islands and the Bailiwick of Jersey, two jurisdictions which
adhere to the Convention through their relationship with the United Kingdom. The 56 respondents
represent state parties in every region and at every stage of development. They also represent legal
systems based on European civil law, English common law, Islamic law, or some combination of
them. They are listed in annex 1, along with whether the information came from a response to a Note
Verbale, the IBA questionnaire, or both.
17 The biography and resources on this topic have been increasing. For example, in addition to the
sources cited in this publication, see, for example, UNCAC Coalition, UNCAC Coalition Statement to
the 7th Conference of States Parties in Vienna, October 20, 2017; Jean-Pierre Brun and others, Public
Wrongs, Private Actions: Civil Lawsuits to Recover Stolen Assets (Washington, D.C., World Bank,
2015); Emile van der Does de Willebois and Jean-Pierre Brun, “Using Civil Remedies in Corruption
and Asset Recovery Cases,” Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, Issue no. 45, 2013,
pp. 615–650; OECD-StAR, Identification and Quantification of the Proceeds of Bribery (Paris, OECD,
2012). Olaya Garcia, Juanita, “Dealing with the Consequences: Repairing the Social Damage Caused
by Corruption.” (January 15, 2016). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475453 or
Olaya Garcia, Juanita and Attisso, Kodjo and Roth, Anja, “Repairing Social Damage Out of Corruption
Cases: Opportunities and Challenges as Illustrated in the Alcatel Case in Costa Rica.” (December
6, 2010). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1779834 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.1779834.
18 See Stefano Betti, Jean Pierre Brun and Vladimir Kozin, Orders without Borders: Direct Enforce-
ment of Foreign Restraint and Confiscation Decisions (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 2021).
10 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 15 ---
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 11

--- Page 16 ---
2 International Standards
Provisions on and references to the recovery of corruption damages are included in
several international and regional anti-corruption treaties, other international standards
emerging from human rights instruments, as well as soft law declarations. Through
these standards developed in recent decades, countries have agreed on principles
and broad mechanisms aimed at ensuring that their legal frameworks provide victims
with the means to recover the damages caused by corruption offences. Therefore, this
chapter is aimed at providing a brief overview of the relevant international obligations
and commitments made by States, namely:
• The United Nations Convention against Corruption
• The Political Declaration adopted at the United Nations Special Session of the
General Assembly
• The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption
• The Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation
of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism
• European Union (EU) Directive 2014/42/EU on the freezing and confiscation of
instrumentalities and proceeds of crime in the EU
• Relevant Human Rights Treaties establishing the rights to remedy
• The Global Forum for Asset Recovery Principles for Disposition and Transfer of
Confiscated Stolen Assets in Corruption Cases
• Relevant Recommendations from the Financial Action Task Force.
2.1 The United Nations Convention against Corruption
(UNCAC)
As mentioned in the introduction, the UNCAC, adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly in 2003 and entered into force in 2005, is the only legally binding universal
anti-corruption instrument. Depending on the wording of each provision, the Convention
imposes obligations and sets standards to be pursued by the 190 State parties (the
number of State parties at the time of drafting this publication). Four of the five relevant
provisions cited below contain mandatory language, thus establishing an obligation for
all State parties to adopt the measures in question.
Another unique aspect of the Convention is the establishment of its Implementation
Review Mechanism, which is a peer review process aimed at supporting States in the
implementation of all substantive provisions of the Convention. It does so through the
identification of challenges, good practices and technical assistance needs. This allows
States to identify gaps in their legislative and institutional frameworks. At the same time,
it allows for the identification of trends in implementation among the broader practi-
tioner and academic anti-corruption community.
12 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 17 ---
2.1.1 Provisions in Chapter III concerning Criminalization and
Law Enforcement
The first provision relevant to the issue of victim compensation is found in Article 32
on the protection of witnesses, experts and victims. Whereas four of the article’s five
paragraphs refer to protection measures, the last paragraph requires State parties to
enable victims’ views and concerns to be considered in criminal proceedings. Close to
ten percent of the 174 State parties reviewed under the first cycle at the time of drafting
received recommendations about this provision, suggesting that the legislation of the
vast majority of States foresees, at least in some way, consideration of the views or
interests of victims in criminal proceedings. Good practices identified by the reviewing
experts included the enactment of a specific law on victims in one State party, and the
use of victim impact statements during criminal corruption proceedings in another.
Article 34 concerning the “consequences of corruption” requires State parties to “take
measures” to address consequences of specific acts of corruption. It also encourages
them to consider corruption as a “relevant factor in legal proceedings to annul or rescind
a contract”. Almost a quarter of the 174 State parties that finalized their first cycle
reviews received recommendations regarding the allowing of corruption to be a relevant
factor in legal proceedings to annul or rescind a contract or withdraw a concession. This
suggests that reviewing experts have interpreted the broad and undefined language of
Article 34 as not necessarily requiring more than that to consider the State party under
review as complying with its obligation to address the consequences of corruption.
The UNCAC’s Article 35 is more
closely relevant in the context of
ensuring victim compensation, as it
Article 34 concerning the requires State parties to take mea-
sures to grant standing to “entities and
“consequences of corruption” persons who have suffered damage
as a result of an act of corruption.”
This allows them to initiate legal
requires State parties to
proceedings “against those responsi-
ble for that damage in order to obtain
“take measures” to address compensation.” Although the UNCAC
does not include a definition of victim,
consequences of specific the Travaux Préparatoires to the Con-
vention include an interpretative note
for Article 35 to clarify that “entities
acts of corruption.
and persons” must be understood
to include natural persons as well
as legal persons, including States.
However, the UNCAC does not define
and, therefore, does not exclude any category of damage.
Just over ten percent of the 174 State parties having completed their first cycle
reviews received recommendations regarding this provision. These ranged from broad
recommendations aimed at ensuring that sufficient measures exist to provide for the
compensation of damages resulting from acts of corruption to very specific recommen-
dations reflecting the different challenges reviewing experts identified with regard to the
implementation of Article 35. As stated in the “State of Implementation of the UNCAC,”
“[t]here are usually no special legal provisions that provide a cause of action based on
damages due to corrupt activities; such cases are dealt with under the general principles
of civil (contract or tort) law.1 As such, in general, reviewing experts considered such
general principles of civil (contract or tort) law as sufficient to ensure compliance with
Article 35.
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 13

--- Page 18 ---
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
2.1.2 Provisions in Chapter V concerning Asset Recovery
Chapter V of the Convention covers asset recovery measures. Article 51 provides that
the return of assets is a fundamental principle of the Convention. Articles 54 and 55
cover mutual legal assistance with a view to confiscating the assets. Article 57 concerns
the return and disposal of assets confiscated through such requests. Finally, Article 53
concerns measures enabling States to directly engage in civil proceedings to recover the
assets and to have their views heard when a decision of confiscation is being considered
by the courts.
Article 53 covers “direct recovery” with a view to allowing the State of origin to
directly take civil action to establish ownership of assets, recover damages, and have its
claims recognized by the State hosting the assets when the latter is making a decision
concerning confiscation. Most pertinently in the context of recovering corruption
damages, Article 53(b) requires State parties to enable their courts to order those who
have committed corruption offences to pay compensation or damages to another State
party that has been harmed by such offences. At the time of drafting this publication,
just over ten percent of the 66 State parties having finalized their second cycle reviews
covering asset recovery provisions received recommendations about this provision. This
suggests that the vast majority of States do allow their courts to order compensation to
be paid to other States.
Finally, Article 57, paragraph 3 (c) concerning the return and disposal of assets,
includes the requirement to give priority consideration to returning confiscated property
to the requesting State Party, returning such property to its prior legitimate owners or
compensating the victims of the crime.
2.2 The Political Declaration adopted at the United
Nations Special Session of the General Assembly
In June 2021, the United Nations Member States and the UNCAC State parties adopted
a political declaration entitled, “Our common commitment to effectively addressing chal-
lenges and implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen
international cooperation.” This was taken at the special session of the General Assem-
bly against corruption. The Declaration, among other pledges, reaffirmed the States’
commitment to implementing the provisions of Chapter V concerning asset recovery,
particularly paragraphs 46 and 49. Although the term “victim” only appears in three
instances (once in the preamble, once in the context of protecting them from retaliation,
and only once in the context of compensation), the declaration included the commit-
ment to establish the necessary legal frameworks allowing State parties to initiate legal
proceedings to claim title to or ownership of assets. It also provided for consideration
of models of disposal and administration of confiscated assets, thereby allocating such
assets to funds that could be used to compensate victims or benefit communities.
49. We […] will consider the various possible models of disposal and administration
of confiscated proceeds of offences established in accordance with the Convention,
including, where feasible, allocating such proceeds to the national revenue fund
or the State treasury, reinvesting funds for special purposes and compensating
victims of the crime, including through the social reuse of assets for the benefit of
communities. […]
14 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

--- Page 19 ---
2.3 The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on
Corruption
The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption was adopted by the Council of
Europe States in 1999 and entered into force in 2003. It is unique in serving as “the first
attempt to define common international rules in the field of civil law and corruption”.2
The Programme of Action against corruption developed by a Multidisciplinary Group on
Corruption prior to its drafting explained the need for such a Convention based on the
following reasoning in the context of countering corruption:
[…] civil law is directly linked to criminal law and administrative law. If an offence
such as corruption is prohibited under criminal law, a claim for damages can be
made which is based on the commission of the criminal act. Victims might find it
easier to safeguard their interests under civil law than to use criminal law. Similarly,
if an administration does not exercise sufficiently its supervisory responsibilities, a
claim for damages may be made.3
This Declaration was developed based on the recognition of the importance of the fact
that “civil law take into account the need to fight corruption and in particular provides
for effective remedies for those whose rights and interests are affected ”by corruption.”4
As such, the Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption includes a breadth
of provisions aimed at ensuring that the Civil Law of its State parties provide the means
to respond to corrupt acts. Therefore, it encompasses provisions concerning: (i) com-
pensation for damage; (ii) liability, including State responsibility for acts of corruption
committed by public officials; (iii) contributory negligence and the potential reduction or
disallowance of compensation; (iv) validity of contracts; (v) protection of employees who
report corruption; (vi) clarity and accuracy of accounts and audits; (vii) the acquisition
of evidence; and (viii) court orders to preserve the assets for the execution of the final
judgment and international cooperation. The provisions most relevant in the context of
the compensation of damages include Articles 1, 3, 4 and 5, as follows:
• Article 1 obliges States to provide effective remedies for victims of corruption,
including the obtention of compensation for damage.
• Article 3 provides for the rights of victims of corruption to initiate an action in order to
obtain full compensation for the damages suffered. It specifies that such damage is
not limited to material damage or loss of profits but may also include non-pecuniary
loss.
• Article 4 provides the general conditions under which damage must be compensated,
which includes (1) that an offender have committed or authorized or even failed to
prevent an act of corruption; (2) that a victim have suffered damage; and (3) that there
be a causal link between the two. The second paragraph foresees the case in which
more than one person may be liable for the same corrupt act.
• Article 5 obliges States to enable victims to claim compensation from a State in the
case in which the damage was caused by an act of corruption by its public officials.
The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption is unique in its explicit
provision of a broad definition of damages in Article 3, as well as the provision for State
liability for the acts of its officials in Article 5.
StAR: Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative 15

--- Page 20 ---
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
2.4 The Council of Europe Convention on Laundering,
Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from
Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism
The Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of
the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism, also known as the Warsaw
Convention or CETS 198, was adopted by Council of Europe States in 2005. The aim
was to facilitate international cooperation and mutual legal assistance in investigating
crime and locating, seizing and confiscating the proceeds thereof. Article 25, even in its
non-mandatory language, closely mirrors the UNCAC’s Article 57 (3) (c), in providing that
a requested State must, “give priority consideration to returning the confiscated property
to the requesting party so that it can give compensation to the victims of the crime or
return such property to their legitimate owners.”
2.5 European Union (EU) Directive 2014/42/EU
on the freezing and confiscation of instrumentalities
and proceeds of crime in the European Union
The European Union Directive 2014/42/EU is aimed at facilitating the confiscation and
recovery of proceeds and instrumentalities of crime within the EU. In its preamble, it
refers to making use of confiscated property for “social purposes” and more pertinently,
Article 8 provides that confiscation measures should not prevent victims from seeking
compensation for their claims, specifically:
[…] Member States should consider taking measures allowing confiscated property
to be used for public interest or social purposes. Such measures could, inter alia,
comprise earmarking property for law enforcement and crime prevention projects,
as well as for other projects of public interest and social utility. That obligation to
consider taking measures entails a procedural obligation for Member States, such
as conducting a legal analysis or discussing the advantages and disadvantages of
introducing measures. […]
Article 8
[…]
10. Where, as a result of a criminal offence, victims have claims against the person
who is subject to a confiscation measure provided for under this Directive, Member
States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the confiscation measure
does not prevent those victims from seeking compensation for their claims.
2.6 Victims as defined in International and Regional
Human Rights Treaties and Standards
Human rights standards are relevant insofar as they provide a definition of victims and
establish a general right to remedy for human rights violations, with this right itself
becoming a key principle of human rights law.5
Most notably, the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and
Abuse of Power6 adopted by the United Nations General Assembly Resolution Number
16 Victims of Corruption: Back for Payback

