--- Page 1 ---
STRENGTHENING WHISTLEBLOWER
PROTECTION MECHANISMS
IN SOUTH AFRICA
Hive Document

--- Page 2 ---
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.........................................................................................................1
I. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT.........................................................................................2
II. POLICY CHALLENGES......................................................................................................3
III. RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................................5
1. ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT WHISTLEBLOWING AUTHORITY...........................5
2. LEGISLATIVE REFORM................................................................................................5
3. INCENTIVES, REWARDS, AND RECOGNITION..........................................................6
4. STRENGTHEN SUPPORT AND REPORTING SYSTEMS...........................................7
5. EXPAND THE DEFINITION OF RETALIATION.............................................................7
6. PUBLIC EDUCATION AND CULTURAL TRANSFORMATION......................................8
IV. CONCLUSION....................................................................................................................9

--- Page 3 ---
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In a country still emerging from the grip of State Capture, the urgency to protect
whistleblowers has never been greater. South Africa stands at a critical juncture in
strengthening its anti-corruption architecture, with a particular focus on protecting
whistleblowers.
The Platform to Protect Whistleblowers in Africa (PPLAAF) and the National Anti-Corruption
Advisory Council (NACAC) convened a high-level conference in March 2025 to assess and
bolster whistleblower protection mechanisms and generate actionable recommendations.
Participants represented civil society, the media, state authorities, whistleblowing experts,
and whistleblowers.
The conference highlighted deep legal, structural, and cultural gaps that continue to deter
individuals from exposing wrongdoing. However, with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s
announcement of a new Whistleblower Protections Bill in 2025, the moment is prime for
implementing a robust, unified legislative and institutional response to support
whistleblowers and foster accountability.
As the country awaits the public comment period for the Whistleblower Protections Bill
and/or amendments to the Protected Disclosures Act (PDA), the conference acted as a
crucial opportunity to garner consensus on approaches and positions on both the PDA and
the broader legislation that may serve as legal protection of whistleblowers in the country.
This document acts as a Hive Document: Designed to be shared and disseminated in
preparation for the public comment period, it consolidates key recommendations debated
and agreed on at the conference.
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Whistleblowers have been essential in exposing corruption scandals in South Africa, saving
the country millions. Yet, many continue to suffer dire consequences, including harassment,
job loss, various threats, and serious financial ramifications. While the PDA provides a legal
framework that meets numerous international standards, it falls short on many accounts.
In 2023, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development (DOJ) released a
discussion document on proposed reforms for South Africa's whistleblower protection
regime. Recently, in his 2025 State of the Nation Address, President Cyril Ramaphosa
stated that, during this financial year, the revised framework will be finalised and the
Whistleblower Protections Bill introduced in Parliament. This Bill and revised framework
are the result of combined efforts by NACAC, the DOJ, and the Presidency.
Importantly, South Africa has a decentralised, collaborative, and multi-agency approach to
fighting corruption. Furthermore, legislation protecting whistleblowers extends beyond the
PDA, which must be read with the legislation that impacts its enforcement. PPLAAF's
positions on the below topics therefore take this broader framework into consideration.
2

--- Page 5 ---
II. POLICY CHALLENGES
While the PDA is considered amongst the strongest and most progressive in Africa, meeting
international standards in several respects, significant gaps leave whistleblowers vulnerable.
The conference identified several notable challenges that face the implementation and
efficacy of South Africa’s whistleblower protection mechanisms, including:
- Fragmented Legal Frameworks
The PDA must be read in conjunction with the Labour Relations Act, Witness Protection Act,
and other legislation that directly or indirectly references whistleblower protection. However,
without expressly stating this within the PDA, confusion and weak enforcement prevails.
- Limited Scope of Protection
Current protections offered in the PDA are confined mostly to formal employees and exclude
citizen whistleblowers, the media, Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), and third-parties that
support whistleblowers. Equally, the PDA focuses on protection against ‘occupational
detriment’ (retaliation faced in relation to one’s work), which overlooks various other forms of
retaliation whistleblowers may experience, including reputational damage.
- Lack of Oversight and Collaboration
Within the broader multi-agency approach to fighting corruption, no single entity currently
monitors or enforces whistleblower protection comprehensively. As such, there is a lack of
clear coordination between agencies, both in relation to investigating disclosures and
protecting whistleblowers - who are often left isolated and alone - to ensure their protection
from retaliation.
- Retaliation and Impunity
Whistleblowers face reprisals with little recourse or support. As such, whistleblowers are
suspended, fired, harassed, and threatened. Criminal sanctions for retaliation are absent,
however, criminalising retaliation is a secure mechanism to thwart retaliation. Furthermore,
there is no clear agency or authority to report retaliation, especially in instances where the
police or other traditional agencies may not be safe to report to. This is necessary for
whistleblowers to receive holistic support, including financial, psychosocial, and
security/safety support.
- Delayed or Ineffective Investigations and Report-Back
Investigations into whistleblower disclosures are often lengthy, and lack clear progress
updates for whistleblowers. This lack of report-back is problematic for a number of reasons,
but, understandably, it creates anxiety for whistleblowers – all of whom want something to
come of their disclosure. As such, whistleblowers may be left in the dark on the status of the
investigation and approach a number of agencies to make their report – leading to a
problematic duplication of efforts.
3

--- Page 6 ---
- Negative Public Perception
Unfortunately, cultural stigma persists in South Africa. Whistleblowing is still associated with
betrayal, being a snitch or an ‘impimpi,’ rather than fulfilling a civic duty and protecting the
public interest.
All of these gaps not only leave whistleblowers vulnerable to retaliation in various forms, but
may also have a chilling effect and deter potential whistleblowers from coming forward out of
fear and/or a lack of understanding of the process of reporting.
4

--- Page 7 ---
III. RECOMMENDATIONS
A number of important interventions were agreed on at the conference, including:
1. ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT WHISTLEBLOWING AUTHORITY
Establishing an independent Whistleblowing Authority is highly recommended to ensure
whistleblower protection and to coordinate amongst institutions and authorities concerned.
The Authority would act as a database for both private and public sector whistleblowers,
independent from other reporting and investigating agencies, like the Auditor General
and Public Protector, which would remain responsible for receiving, investigating,
and addressing disclosures.
The Authority will:
● Provide advice to whistleblowers pre and post-disclosure;
● Direct whistleblowers to the appropriate recipient for receipt of disclosures and act as
a referral and monitoring mechanism for these recipients;
● Receive, investigate, and address complaints of retaliation against whistleblowers,
with orders for protection being binding;
● Receive and investigate disclosures and issue remedial action;
● Monitor and oversee whistleblower cases reported to competent authorities, as
outlined in the PDA;
● Handle reports of improper or delayed investigation by competent authorities;
● Provide legal, financial, and psychological support to whistleblowers;
● Safeguard whistleblowers from physical harm by liaising with relevant institutions like
the Office of Witness Protection, amongst others;
● Oversee and monitor legislative enforcement, including avenues for reform and
development;
● Offer guidance and monitor the development of institutional whistleblowing
mechanisms, both in the public and private sector, and sanction for non-compliance;
● Conduct education and awareness raising campaigns on whistleblowing.
It is also recommended that a Whistleblower Support Fund be established under the new
Authority’s remit, headed by a retired judge.
Other than protecting and encouraging whistleblowers, the myriad benefits of such an
authority includes an increase in public trust, ensuring South Africa’s framework is compliant
with international standards, the prevention of and remedial response to retaliation, and
halting the duplication of efforts by both independent and state agencies.
2. LEGISLATIVE REFORM
To ensure a comprehensive and effective framework for whistleblower protection, the new
Whistleblower Protections Bill or any amendments to the Protected Disclosures Act (PDA)
must incorporate the following provisions:
5

--- Page 8 ---
1. Remove the Good Faith Requirement
Protection and support for whistleblowers must not be contingent on the
whistleblower’s good faith or personal motives. It is essential that the validity of the
disclosure, rather than subjective intent, forms the basis of protection.
2. Reverse the Burden of Proof in Retaliation Cases
In cases of alleged retaliation, the onus should lie with the accused party to prove
that the retaliatory action was unrelated to the whistleblower’s disclosure.
Whistleblowers should not bear the burden of establishing this connection.
3. Extend Protections to a Broader Group of Actors
Legal protections must be extended beyond employees to include citizen
whistleblowers, journalists, civil society organisations (CSOs), and third parties who
assist or are associated with whistleblowers. This must include protection from
indirect retaliation targeting facilitators, colleagues, or family members of the
reporting individual.
4. Implement Clear Timelines and Communication Duties
The Bill or amendments should mandate strict and enforceable timeframes for the
processing and investigation of protected disclosures. Responsible authorities must
also have a positive duty to regularly inform whistleblowers about the status and
progress of their disclosures.
5. Criminalise Retaliation Against Whistleblowers
Acts of retaliation should be formally criminalised, with penalties including a minimum
of five years’ imprisonment and/or substantial financial fines. Such penalties will
provide a strong deterrent against punitive measures.
6. Provide Immunity from Liability
Whistleblowers must be granted immunity from any civil, criminal, or administrative
liability arising from reasonable actions taken to make a disclosure or protect their
anonymity - provided they had a reasonable belief that their actions met the
conditions of the PDA or the proposed Bill.
7. Integrate Reforms from the Witness Protection Act (WPA)
The WPA revisions should be integrated into whistleblower protection mechanisms to
provide essential safeguards. This includes anonymity, security and safety measures,
relocation assistance, and access to financial and social support where necessary.
3. INCENTIVES, REWARDS, AND RECOGNITION
Rewards are an effective tool to motivate whistleblowers, with various studies proving that
they enhance the quality and quantity of information. Rewards may also provide necessary
support to whistleblowers facing significant personal and professional risks. Therefore,
awards or rewards for whistleblowers should be introduced in South Africa.
The Whistleblower Regulatory Authority may oversee this process in collaboration with
authorities. In meritorious cases, where significant asset recoveries have occurred as a
6

--- Page 9 ---
result of or with the help of the protected disclosures, awards of a percentage of assets
recovered should be considered. To avoid perverse incentives, discretion should be used
when determining whether to issue an award.
Beyond financial rewards, recognition also plays a vital role in encouraging whistleblowing.
Acknowledging the courage and integrity of whistleblowers can foster a culture of
transparency and accountability both within organisations and at a national level. This
recognition can take various forms, such as public commendation or media campaigns.
Recognition may also have the positive knock-on effect of challenging negative perceptions
of whistleblowing.
4. STRENGTHEN SUPPORT AND REPORTING SYSTEMS
To ensure whistleblowers are holistically supported and empowered, and that their
disclosures lead to substantive change, the following measures must be implemented:
● Enhance Internal and External Reporting Mechanisms
Internal reporting systems must be strengthened to ensure they are safe,
confidential, and responsive. External reporting channels must be clearly defined and
expanded to include civil society organisations and the media.
● Provide Access to Legal and Psychosocial Support
Whistleblowers must have access to free or affordable legal aid, as well as
psychosocial counselling to support their mental and emotional well-being throughout
the reporting process.
● Ensure Interim Income and Safety Support
In high-risk cases, interim financial support, physical safety measures, and relocation
assistance must be provided to protect whistleblowers and minimise the personal
cost of disclosure.
● Criminalise Breaches of Confidentiality
Any unauthorised disclosure of a whistleblower’s identity must be penalised through
criminal sanctions to ensure confidentiality is upheld and trust in the system is
maintained.
5. EXPAND THE DEFINITION OF RETALIATION
The legal definition of retaliation must be broadened to encompass the full range of harmful
actions whistleblowers may face. The current scope of “occupational detriment” is too
narrow. The definition should be expanded to “detrimental action,” which includes but is not
limited to:
○ Intimidation and threats, including legal, physical, and otherwise
○ Online harassment and/or defamation
○ Social ostracism and reputational harm
○ Financial hardship and blacklisting
○ Occupational detriment
7

--- Page 10 ---
Whistleblowers must also be able to pursue civil remedies for all forms of retaliation. An
independent Authority should be empowered to adjudicate such cases swiftly, or to issue
legally binding remedial action/thwarting of retaliation for urgent interim relief where
necessary.
6. PUBLIC EDUCATION AND CULTURAL TRANSFORMATION
Public awareness and cultural shifts on whistleblowing are imperative to strengthening the
broader whistleblower support system, as well as in ensuring whistleblowers continue to
come forward as South Africa develops a strong culture of whistleblowing, transparency, and
accountability. As such, the following are recommended:
● Launch national campaigns focusing on whistleblower protection and the new Bill,
including at grass-roots and municipal levels;
● Integrate whistleblower education into schools, community forums, and religious
institutions as the right thing to do;
● Foster and sustain public-private collaboration;
● Train journalists, CSOs, and community leaders on ethical handling of disclosures
and actively encourage collaborative efforts to support whistleblowers and
disseminate their disclosures.
8

--- Page 11 ---
IV. CONCLUSION
Whistleblower protection is fundamental to a transparent, accountable democracy.
Legislative change alone is not enough. It must be accompanied by institutional innovation,
cultural transformation, and sustained civic engagement- embedded in an all of society
approach
The proposed Independent Whistleblower Authority, comprehensive reforms to the PDA
including the scope of whistleblowers and protection offered, financial and other support
mechanisms, establishing rewards, and public recognition are essential next steps.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Contacts
Email
info@pplaaf.org
Site Web
www.pplaaf.org
Médias sociaux
@pplaaf

